If you are developing a mobile application or website for your business, you may be considering outsourcing design and development to a contractor or an agency.

Depending on your situation, you may consider outsourcing because you do not have the expertise or the right team to develop your website or mobile application in house or you just want to keep cost low by outsourcing these functions for a one-time fee as opposed to having to hire someone for cash or equity.

Regardless of why you may choose to outsource and regardless of whether you outsource all or part of the design and development work, you should have a clear contract with whomever you outsource to.  Having a contract in place will help ensure that the contractor or agency delivers the agreed upon work product and that all of the designs and code become assets of your business.

Below are 9 contract tips for outsourcing website or mobile application development:

1. The Parties: Any legal agreement you enter into with a contractor or agency should clearly indicate who the parties are (including each party’s name, address and contact information) and the agreement should be signed and dated by each party or an authorized representative (if a party to the agreement is an entity and not a person). If you want to take this one step further, you can also opt to have each party initial each page of the agreement including any schedules or exhibits to the agreement.

2. Scope of Work and Deliverable Requirements: Any agreement with a designer or developer should clearly indicate the scope of work to be performed, the timing for completion and each milestone along the way and what the deliverables will be upon completion or at each milestone.  The scope of work to be performed should be as detailed as possible and can often be included in a separate exhibit which is incorporated by reference into the agreement.  For each task in the scope of work, the agreement or exhibit detailing the scope of work should set clear expectations on the timing for completion as well as what the deliverable (e.g. files, source code, wireframes, etc.) will be for each task in the scope of work.  If the development process requires your approval at various stages to get to the final product, this should also be clearly indicated in the agreement.

3. Responsibilities of Each Party: Like any agreement with a service provider, your contract with a designer or developer should clearly identify what the responsibilities of each party will be.  Typically, the responsibilities of the contractor or agency include performing the agreed upon tasks in the scope of work and delivering the agreed upon deliverables in the time frame agreed to.  The responsibilities of the client typically includes making timely payment(s) and providing approvals and feedback in due course.

4. Clear Payment Terms: When it comes to the dollars and cents, it is of utmost importance to have clear payment terms in every agreement with a designer or developer.  Things to clearly indicate are how much will need to be paid (e.g. project fee, hourly fee, etc.), how will payments be made and when will payments be required.  Payment terms could require payment at the onset (in full or in part), payments throughout the relationship upon completion of agreed upon milestones or payment upon completion of the project.  There is not one right approach to payment terms since each relationship may be different, but the important thing is to have a clear agreement on the payment terms which get memorialized in the contract.  As a client, you may also want to consider having the ability to delay a required payment if the work product delivered is not what you bargained for.

5. Confidentiality: In most cases, you will be disclosing sensitive information and ideas to your designer or developer.  Hence, it is crucial that the contractor or agency you hire agrees to keep everything that you share with them confidential and that they will not use anything you share with them for any reason other than to perform the services they are hired for.

6. Ownership of IP: This is likely the most crucial component of any agreement you enter into with a designer or developer.  Many people mistakenly believe that they will own the rights to work created by a designer or a developer simply because they paid the contractor to create something. However, by default the law automatically grants all of the ownership rights in whatever the contractor creates unless he is an employee of the company. In order for you to get ownership rights to the designs or software created by the contractor or agency, your agreement must include “work for hire” and “assignment of interest” provisions.

7. Term and Termination: Clearly indicating the term of the agreement and including mechanics on how you can terminate the agreement if things do not go as you expected is crucial.  As the client, having the ability to terminate with or without cause will provide you with the maximum flexibility if things do not go as you expected.  One thing to bear in mind is that the contractor may want to receive partial payment if you terminate the agreement before the work is completed, especially if there were milestones and deliverables along the way.

8. Anti-Assignment Provision: When you hire a contractor or agency to provide you with design or development services, you want to ensure that whomever you hire is actually the one doing the work. After all, you probably chose to hire them because you liked them the best over your other options for whatever reason.  An anti-assignment provision will prevent the service provider from assigning its responsibilities under the contract to another party (e.g. a sub-contractor) without your written consent.

9. Liability for infringement of third party intellectual property: Since the work product created by the contractor or agency will ultimately become an asset of your business, you want to be certain that you have recourse against the service provider in the event that anything they deliver to you infringes on a third party’s intellectual property rights.  The way this is typically achieved is by including a representation to be made by the contractor that all the deliverables they provide do not and will not infringe on someone else’s IP rights coupled with indemnification in the event a claim does arise.  In the event that there ends up being a third-party claim, this would give you recourse against the contractor for a breach of such representation.

On a final note, as with any legal agreement, it is always best to have a lawyer help you prepare your legal documents to ensure that you are adequately protected.  However, one way to keep costs low is to start with a form development agreement, take it as far as you can yourself and then hire a lawyer to do the final review to make sure nothing is overlooked or incorrect.|||

If you are developing a mobile application or website, you may be considering outsourcing design and development to a contractor or an agency.