Being a lifetime wife and mother has afforded me the luxury of having multiple and even simultaneous careers: I’ve been a chauffeur. A chef. An interior decorator. A landscape architect, as well as a gardener. I’ve been a painter. A furniture restorer. A personal shopper. A veterinarian’s assistant and sometimes the veterinarian…. An accountant, a banker, and on occasion, a broker. I’ve been a beautician. A map. A psychic. Santa Claus. The Tooth Fairy. The T.V. Guide. A movie reviewer. An angel. Truly, I have done everything. God….For a long time I have felt like I inadvertently got my master’s in How to Take Care of Everybody Except Yourself and then a PhD, In How to Pretend Like You Don’t Mind. But I do mind.”

 Said the Blurb on the cover.

Seriously how are you not going to turn off your phone, grab your ‘reading’ cushion, pour yourself a glass of wine (yup, this is one of those grown up reads) and fall headlong into the pages only occasionally crawling out for the occasional sip of wine, then jump back in?

For me, each and every one of Ms. McMillan’s books have been a treat, their realness, the human story lines are full of heart and soul and always leave me highly entertained and enlightened.

In the pages we meet Marilyn Grimes, a wife and mother of three, whose life has been full of putting her dreams aside for those of her husband and grown children. As is most of her books, this story is about family and personal drama, midlife crisis and honesty, the fact that at some times in the story we ‘hear’ Marilyn’s weakness as she grapples with the hand that life has dealt her, is so engaging because to me this shows how utterly human she is.

Family, marriage, kids and human weakness is something that Ms. McMillan always delivers in such a real way that long after you close the book you find yourself drawing the same similarities with your own family in real-time and you find yourself re-loving them all over again. Weak or strong, outspoken or wall flower, you draw strength from learning where your place is.|||

Being a lifetime wife and mother has afforded me the luxury of having multiple and even simultaneous careers: I’ve been a chauffeur. A chef. Done everything