Enhances html-webpack-plugin functionality by allowing you to specify the modules you want to externalize from node_modules in development and a CDN in production.

Basically this will allow you to greatly reduce build time when developing and improve page load performance on production.

It is recommended to run webpack on node 5.x or higher

Require the plugin in your webpack config:

Add the plugin to your webpack config:

This will generate an file with something like below:

When you set to , it will output urls using , so you might need to expose it as some sort of static route.

You can also use your own custom html template, please refer to html-webpack-plugin.

Please see the example folder for a basic working example.

You can pass an object options to WebpackCdnPlugin. Allowed values are as follows:

The available options for each module, which is part of an array.

The name of the module you want to externalize

A variable that will be assigned to the module in global scope, webpack requires this. If not supplied than it will be the same as the name.

You can specify a path to the main file that will be used, this is useful when you want the minified version for example if main does not point to it.

If the module comes with style sheets, you can also specify it as a path.

flag defaults to , which will output uri using the CDN, when it will use the file from folder locally.

You can specify a custom template url with the following replacement strings:

: The name of the module e.g.

: The version of the module e.g.

: The path to the file e.g.

A common example is you can use cdnjs e.g. . If not specified it will fallback to using unpkg.com.

Similar to , this option overrides the default template url for when is

Makes the assets appear before or after then bundle.

Overrides the global publicPath that was set in , note this is always when prod is so that it makes use of the CDN location because it is a remote resource.

This is a pretty simple plugin and caters mostly for my needs. However, I have made it as flexible and customizable as possible.

If you happen to find any bugs, do please report it in the issues or can help improve the codebase, pull requests are always welcomed.|||

webpack-cdn-plugin - A webpack plugin that use externals of CDN urls for production and local node_modules for development