A few weeks ago, I wrote about EA Roadmaps and the process of reconciling them across an enterprise’s complex landscape. The blog generated several insightful comments, and some messaged me on related topics. One such topic that continues to generate interest is that of Enterprise Architecture tools, and their utility in the roadmap process.

During my consulting days, I helped organizations evaluate tools to enable aspects of their EA. I also led an Enterprise Architecture survey ( ), that highlighted an interesting observation: Visio is by far the most popular and common tool to document Architecture. In many organizations, Visio aided by the office suite (Powerpoint, Excel and Word) is used to ‘document’ and communicate Architectures.

My interest in EA tools continued when I took on the responsibility for EA processes at a multinational manufacturing organization. There are two globally supported tools for EA and business process modeling that coexist with several other tools used for niche technical and functional requirements. The discussions on ‘ideal EA tool’ are occasionally revived when there are changes in leadership and a refocus of domains. We review alternatives, only to realize that switching to yet another ‘swiss army knife’ in the marketplace won’t drastically transform the practice of EA.

I periodically take calls from EA tool vendors, and continue to observe and learn about their emerging capabilities. The tools are evolving to address the requirements for architecting on cloud platforms and enabling digital transformations. Many in the marketplace do a good job of supporting key modeling requirements including:

My discussion with peers from across industries indicates that even in 2017 the landscape for EA tools continues to be fragmented. A majority of large organizations don’t depend on single tools, but rather leverage a “best of the breed” approach for specific BIDAT, functional and domain requirements.   Visio, combined with office suite of applications continue to be the primary choice for the majority of Architecture modeling and communication requirements. This is because EA tools, like many technology platforms, are designed to be complex, and require resources to manage and sustain. A few aspects to watch-out for include:

Reading thus far, you might notice that I skipped the discussion on the role of EA tools in enabling roadmap reconciliation. As I stated in my previous post, this process requires insights into business and strategy that Architects, analysts and executives bring to the table. This aspect of human intelligence is yet to be replaced by “AI enabled EA tools.”

Bottomline: Assuming your EA modeling requirements are well defined and you have the executive support, you may have to evaluate more than one toolset for distinct requirements.

Thanks for reading! Please click on Like, Share, Tweet and Comment below to continue this conversation | Reposted on my blog|||

