I AM anti-New World Order.  Here on this site, I show how We can build a society with NO leader.  Leaders emerge for each problem that needs to be solved for, with the best Ethical solutions, not the cheapest/most profitable or leaving a problem to fester because there is no money to solve for it.I show how We can build a society with no top-down controlmind (government), solving problems, locally with up to a planetary reach for solutions, bottom up - not passing "laws" and then enFORCING them on Others (bestowing power over Others which draws psychopaths).I show how We can build a society with freedom of religion, and freedom from religion, where Each may believe as One's heart draws One and is judged solely on whether the behavior One chooses falls within Ethics.I show how We can build a society with no "physical" currency (barter, trade, work exchange, coins (metals), bills, electronic bits), no accounting for Human energy added into a system that accounts for Human energy added, promoting the psychopaths who are drawn by the power over Others that such physical accounting units offers.  Rather, We can use social currency - reputation, thanks, appreciation, love, lauds, fame, caring, bragging rights, and Self-satisfaction, accounted for in the hearts and minds of Others and Self.It is the game-changing technologies We very recently acquired on this planet that makes this possible.  Some has been hidden from Us for at least 60 years, others are in plain sight.  But We have three technologies that can set Us on a far better path than what We have now.First is energy from the aether.  It is hidden because the psychopaths in control have one foundational tool to power:  money.  Accounting for Human energy.  If We have a source of clean, inexhaustible energy, accounting for Human energy becomes pointless - like accounting for grains of sand.  Small wonder They hide and suppress "free" energy, lie and say it's "impossible."Second is robots.  Before You have a knee-jerk reaction having to do with robots taking over Your jobs, understand that with free energy and no accounting for Human energy comes the ability for ALL of Us to live as the useless eliters do today - with leisure and industry of interest.  In other words...  Doing what We Each WANT to do.  The artificial scarcity that money systems create, the planned obsolescence that creates the vast bulk of the waste on Our planet, poverty, wage/debt slavery, profiteering, and war will vanish and the abundance of Our planet can flow to ALL of Us.  Of course...  There will be necessary work no One WANTS to do.  That is where We apply robots.  Money is useful only when it is motivating People to do necessary work They don't want to do.  With robots...money becomes useless.Third is the interweb.  An open-source site allowing Us to report problems, including emergencies, to Those who care, locally, and on up to a planetary level, will allow Us to solve them ethically, eliminating the need to put Some above Others to force Their choices.I invite You read the following articles for details, analyses, thoughts, and suggestions on how We can get there.  Withdrawing consent from the present, psychopath-promoting systems while not creating controversy is the first step:|||

