The calculus for whether a service should be public or privately held is pretty simple. It’s supply and demand. Do we want an increase in demand, thus supply, or a decrease?

Increasing demand results in increased revenue and profit. The private sector thrives in this domain. Decreasing demand results in decreased revenue and costs, for governments this means taxes and spending. We are slave to incentive.

Take transport. More people using ‘public’ transport is better. Busses, trains, that kind of thing. The reason? To reduce demand for roads of course. Less people using roads is better, so they are better publically owned. The government is incentivised to find ways to reduce their use by optimising town planning or building railways for leasing to private operators.

The postal service is undeniably far better off in private hands. It has every reason to want to increase demand by providing a cheaper, more efficient service. The better the service Royal Mail provide, the more people will want to use it. In government hands, it might as well be both rubbish and expensive. The greater the demand for it, the greater the budget allocation it needs and the the more work it is to run.

Healthcare is the opposite. In an ideal world, everyone would be perfectly healthy. There would be no need to use the health service at all. The government is uniquely placed to reduce demand for healthcare. From better nutrition and lifestyle support and education to addressing public health hazards like water and air quality, reducing healthcare demand requires holistic action and absolutely not in the medical sense of the word.

A private healthcare system, insurance based or otherwise, conversely wants more demand. The iller you are, the more you spend. There is no preventative incentive at all for them. Why discourage smoking when you can sell cancer drugs? Why invest in nutritional research when you can just charge fatties higher premiums? The counter argument is always ‘insurance companies don’t want to pay out’. It’s obviously flawed. All insurance companies care about is not paying out more than they charge for premiums in the aggregate. In fact, paying out more simply means they can charge more in the following cycle.

Simple, clear thinking is woefully missed in politics. Note that left and right doesn’t factor into this, there is nothing dogmatic about it. It’s just optimising incentives. We could go on and on, education, policing, the fire service, sports facilities… whatever.

What would provide the greater benefit, less or more demand?|||

The calculus for whether a service should be public or privately held is pretty simple. It’s supply and demand. Do we want an increase in demand, thus supply...