It is set to be the first ship to sail the seas without a single human on board.

Norway-based Yara has revealed its plans to develop the world’s first all-electric and autonomous container ship that is predicted to remove 747 tons (678 tonnes) of carbon dioxide from the air by reducing diesel-powered truck haulage by 40,000 journeys a year.

Named ‘Yara Birkeland’, the high tech ship is set to sail in 2018 - it will initially be operated as a manned vessel, but the team has noted 2020 as when it will be fully autonomous.

The roads are becoming overcrowded with the number of tech giants and carmakers racing to release a fleet of self-driving taxis.

But, while they fight over the roads, Yara is set to take over the seas.

The firm has teamed up with maritime technology company Kongsberg to build what is deemed an ‘innovation to protect our planet’.

‘Every day, more than 100 diesel truck journeys are needed to transport products from YARA's Porsgrunn plant to ports in Brevik and Larvik where we ship products to customers around the world,’ said Svein Tore Holsether, President and CEO of YARA.

‘With this new autonomous battery-driven container vessel we move transport from road to sea and thereby reduce noise and dust emissions, improve the safety of local roads, and reduce NOx and CO2 emissions.’

Kongsberg is tasked with the development and delivery of all key enabling technologies on YARA Birkeland including the sensors and integration required for remote and autonomous operations, in addition to the electric drive, battery and propulsion control systems.

‘By moving container transport from land to sea, YARA Birkeland is the start of a major contribution to fulfilling national and international environmental impact goals,’ Geir Håøy, President and CEO of Kongsberg, said.

‘The new concept is also a giant step forward towards increased seaborne transportation in general.’

‘Every day, more than 100 diesel truck journeys are needed to transport products from YARA's Porsgrunn plant to ports in Brevik and Larvik where we ship products to customers around the world,’ said Svein Tore Holsether, President and CEO of YARA. ‘With this new autonomous battery-driven container vessel we move transport from road to sea and thereby reduce noise and dust emissions, improve the safety of local roads, and reduce NOx and CO2 emissions'

And the firms noted that Kongsberg’s integrated control and monitory system are already capable of providing technology for remote and unmanned operations.

‘Developing systems for autonomous operations is a major opening and natural step for KONGSBERG, considering our decades of expertise in the development and integration of advanced sensors, control and communication systems for all areas of ship operations,’ said Håøy.

‘YARA Birkeland will set the benchmark for the application of innovative maritime technology for more efficient and environmentally friendly shipping.’|||

Norway-based Yara has revealed its plans for  the world’s first all-electric and autonomous container ship that will set sail in 2018. And it is predicted to remove 747 tons of CO2 from the air.