A ton of internet marketers have this silly misconception that high ticket affiliate programs are so much harder to sell than those cheap low quality $7 wsos and $10 dollar low quality courses that everyone and there mother is promoting.

The fact is, those cheap low ticket affiliate programs are not only more competitive to promote and sell but you are facing a ton more competition in most cases.

Think about it, I want you to do a quick Google search for the next $10 dollar shiny object that you are thinking about promoting that has gotten a lot of publicity.

Or better yet, go to JVZoo or Clickbank and look at the top sellers all time and in the past 30 days and check out the competition that you are faced with.

Chances are you will see page after page of Google listings that will go something like this review of so and so etc… etc…

Good luck ranking in the search engines and getting that lucrative 1,2, or 3 position on the first page of Google for that particular affiliate product.

Some stiff competition for a measly chance at earning a low ticket commission.

You better have a high ranking blog, or website, or your good at ranking Youtube videos to stand a chance, or you will be eaten alive by the internet marketing sharks.

Some of these internet marketers have some really big chompers, and they are not scared to use them:)

Ok, back to my low ticket point here.

Can you sell these low ticket affiliate programs?

Sure you can, but you better have an email list, or have built up a nice social media presence, so that yo have an audience to promote these low ticket affiliate programs to.

I hope I am getting through to you a bit.

I am not saying completely ditch the low ticket affiliate programs, some of them can convert very well, and some people just do not have the money for the higher ticket affiliate programs.

But that is ok, they are not your ideal customer anyways for your high ticket offers.

I want you to do both, add low ticket affiliate offers to the mix, but concentrate the majority of your time promoting and selling these high ticket affiliate programs, or even biz opps in some cases.

If it is a great opportunity, and pays well why not get rewarded much more for your efforts.

High Ticket affiliate offers and biz opps based on experience are maybe only 2-3 times harder to sell in my opinion, and in some cases they are even easier to sell.

Its all about targeting your ideal audience.

So, let us do the math.

How many $10.00 dollar low ticket affiliate programs do you have to sell to earn a $1,000 dollar commission for example?

My point: High ticket affiliate programs and business opportunities is where the big money is made online hands down!!

This is based on my ten years experience as an internet marketer and affiliate.

So I am speaking from a ton of experience in the marketing trenches of the Internet.

Which brings me on to my next point.

Your worth the big bucks right?

So, add at least a few high ticket affiliate programs and business opportunities to the mix or you will be losing a lot of money and working for peanuts.

Your not a peanut farmer are you?

No you are not Jimmy Carter:)

Let me give you a few tips on where to find and how to promote these high ticket biz opps and affiliate offers that pay $1,000 and more in affiliate commissions.

Not only do high ticket affiliate programs pay 100 times more for each sale that you generate.

The competition 9 times out of ten is a lot less stiff.

The truth is you are going to promote your high ticket affiliate offers and business opportunities in pretty much the same way that you promote the low ticket affiliate products that you promote.

Just find the entrepreneurs and biz opp people out there that have the money to spend and can appreciate a good opportunity when they see one.

If they feel your high ticket offer or business opportunity can teach them worthwhile things, and make them money in the long run, then they will see value in what it is that you are offering and hit the buy now button.

I promote my high ticket affiliate offers on social media, my blogs, Youtube review videos, my email list, and seo for example.

Facebook is a good way to promote high ticket offers once you start to build up a nice sized friends list, and audience.

My favorite high ticket offer – biz opp that I share with you below shows you how to market like a ninja on Facebook .

Also, if you have not built an email list up I highly, highly, recommend that you do.

Email marketing is where the majority of the money that you will make online will come from.

If you have not learned how to do email marketing correctly invest in a course it will be money well spent trust me.

Social media, email marketing, and video marketing are the big three nowadays with email being king in the r.o.i. aspect.

The fact is there are numerous effective ways to promote high ticket affiliate offers and business opportunities.

The trick is finding your ideal customer and getting your offer into his or her face to make the most money possible from your affiliate efforts.

Just be persistent with your marketing efforts and you will eventually see those high ticket commissions come in.

What is my personal favorite high ticket affiliate program And Why?

Well my personal favorite is a business opportunity as well as a high ticket affiliate program all rolled into one sweet little package.

You are actually buying a license which means a lot less competition for you and more affiliate commissions in your pocket.

Ok, here is the deal.

How would you like to earn $1,000 instant Paypal commissions on all backend sales? How would you like to earn 100% commissions on every product that a top internet marketer ever created including upsells, downsells, and recurring? How would you like to own every product that this top internet marketer has ever created in the past as well as in 2017? How would you like to be a Facebook ninja? How would you like a ten out of ten rated affiliate marketing video training course that shows you step by step how this top internet marketer made almost $1.5 million dollars last year alone step by step?

Well, you get all that and more that is why I am a licensee.

So if you like the big money this is what I recommend.

If you have any questions related to the link above feel free to email me at [email protected]

And I will be glad to help:)

Good luck! Now go out there and make some real money!|||

How And Why You Should Promote And Sell High Ticket Affiliate Programs And Biz Opps. $1,000 Commissions This Is My Secret Weapon For Promoting Those Juicy High...