We're delighted – and still slightly flabbergasted – to announce that our sellers have made more than $250,000,000 through SendOwl. That's an amazing achievement. We're so happy that we've been able to help so many entrepreneurs jack in their day jobs and do what they love.

So let's take this chance to celebrate why digital selling is such a cool idea.

You really can: we're not just saying this to make you feel better. Some of our sellers earn a bit on the side, most make a good living, while a smaller but significant number earn six figures plus.

In total, our sellers have made $250,000,000 since 2010. That's enough money to buy you:

We've heard this story from so many of our sellers: you started out because you had an itch to scratch. Something you wanted to build because it was bugging you. Or something you wanted to say because it was buzzing around in your head and wouldn't let you sleep.

And then, almost before you knew it, you realised you'd stumbled across an entire business model. One that would let you jack in your job and go solo. Get a better work life balance. Even employ people who share your passion for your products.

You'd become an entrepreneur and you were darned proud of it.

After having talked to a lot of successful sellers we've found another common thread: everyone started somewhere, with one sale (or, happy days, 5 sales!), but learned quickly and got really good at running a digital product business pretty fast.

As well as being an expert photographer, crochet star, artist, developer, and so on.

Running a digital products business isn't easy, but there's a lot of help out there.

You can also employ some pretty cool techniques to get people buying more that work best online: cart abandonment, upsells and pay what you want pricing, to name but three.

I'm not quite sure how cart abandonment would work in a physical shop. Maybe a sales person would pounce as soon as you put something back on the shelf and ask plaintively: 'are you sure you don't need that pastry lattice cutter'?

Last time we checked, our sellers came from 86 countries and sold to nearly every country in the world. This cross-border reach is partly what makes digital selling so exciting.

You can sell a fitness video to someone the other side of the world without having to worry about shipping, warehousing and all the other logistical nightmares that accompany selling physical products.

All you and your customer need is an internet connection and a means of payment - and bitcoins or PayPal will do nicely if your customers don't have credit cards.

Once you have a global audience you can still make a good chunk of money by specialising in a niche.

And what niches some of you have explored! Patterns for dolls' clothing, Photoshop presets, portfolio systems based on WordPress, indie video games set in prisons and many more.

Own that niche and pocket those profits.

Anyone want to listen to a suit froms Exxon Mobil or Walmart talk about their business? No, me neither. They might have something interesting to say, but you can be sure the lawyers at their megabucks corporations are working very hard to make sure they never say it.

However, in the upstart digital world successful sellers can actually be pretty interesting people. And they're not afraid to speak out. How do we know? Well, we recorded them. With their permission of course.

Check out our our special edition of our Digital Hustle podcast, celebrating SendOwl sellers hitting the $250,000,000 mark, to hear what they've got to say.

So here's the deal: we'll continue to maintain a stable and easy to use platform that you enjoy using. And we'll keep thinking up new ways to help you sell more, making it as easy as possible for you to grow your business. Simple!|||

Digital sellers make more than 1/4 billion dollars using digital delivery service SendOwl. Find out why digital selling is such a good idea.