Even as the woman who said Kitchings raped her cowered in her Jupiter bedroom closet, hysterical, and dialed 911, she remembered something. Plagued recently by billing spats with the ride-sharing service, she’d made a “screen grab” of the Uber app image on her phone just before pickup.

Kitchings most recently worked at the KidSafe Sanctuary in suburban West Palm Beach. Its parent agency, Place of Hope, said Tuesday it had placed him on leave “pending the outcome of the criminal proceedings.” It added in the prepared statement: “Our first priority is for the care and security of children and youth placed with Place of Hope.”

According to a Jupiter police affidavit, the woman told investigators she’d gone Saturday to SunFest, the art and music festival in downtown West Palm Beach, and at about 12:30 a.m. Sunday, contacted Uber through its smartphone app. Her driver: Kitchings, whom Uber said has worked for the service for about six months.

The woman said Kitchings picked up two other women along with her and dropped them off first. She told police Kitchings then began to “verbally flirt with her.” She said he tried to fondle her and she pushed him away, but he persisted, according to the report. Eventually he tried to push her hand into his lap, but she pulled back.

She said the car left an unspecified highway and that she tried to jump out, but found the car door locked. She said Kitchings told her he had a gun under the seat and would kill her if she didn’t do what he wanted. He then forced the woman into a sex act, according to the affidavit.

Later, she told police, he drove her to her home and she ran out. She said she believed Kitchings had driven off, but as she got to her front door and began to open it, he came up behind her, grabbed her by her arm and pushed her inside, screaming, the police report said.

She said Kitchings placed his hand to his waistband — she wasn’t sure if she saw a gun — and said he’d kill her “and her dogs” if she didn’t quiet down. She said he threw her onto her bed and again forced her to have sex with him. Then he told her as he left that if she told anyone about what happened, he’d return and kill her, according to the affidavit.

The report said the woman then called 911, saying, “I’ve been raped.” She said she’d locked herself in her bedroom and hidden in her closet “in case the guy comes back.” The report said she had the presence of mind to check the screen grab and gave police the license tag number. That led police to Kitchings.

The report does not disclose the woman’s age or where she lives, but it said she talked to police both at Jupiter Medical Center and at Butterfly House, a center in Wellington where police often take alleged victims of sexual assault.

A 2014 Palm Beach Post story on the opening of the complex said it would house six girls, ages 8 to 17, who had been shuffled around foster homes for years. Kitchings and his wife and daughter would live in a two-bedroom suite in the $650,000 complex, which contained six bedrooms and spanned 5,500 square feet.

“Kids live up to the quality of their environment,” Kitchings said in the story. “If they go into a home that’s rundown with holes in the wall, they tend to tear more holes in the wall. But if you demonstrate there are nice things in life, you show them those things are achievable.”

A Facebook page which shares a cellphone number with one Kitchings has used offers a class for Free Uber Driver Training. It presents the chance to “learn to Uber from one of the best. As a top-rated Uber driver here in Palm Beach County, I am offering to help you, a new Uber driver, understand the Drivers’ app, pitfalls to avoid and secrets that will make you a successful driver.” A call to that number Tuesday was not returned.|||

For two decades, Gary Timothy Kitchings was the guy people admired. Father of an adopted child.