At Qebot, we’re easing the lives of business owners and operators and increasing productivity. Our mission is enabling businesses to do more with improved technology management and access. It’s why we firmly believe that the next step in business software lies in connecting the technology you use on a daily basis. We want you to have more functionality with less hassle and lower costs. It’s what pushes us to work around the clock to innovate and analyze what business owners want and need. We’re partnering with top technology providers to help solve the equation, so you can enjoy every tool, application, program and plug-in you could possibly need to grow your company and pursue your dreams, all in one place.

But here’s some food for thought:  having all of your programs in one spot might sound overly simple, but what is the actual value add for a business? We think that the upside is limitless, and will eventually change the way we manage technology as a whole.

For the past few years I’ve dedicated my time to really learn what makes business owners tick, understand their pain points, and engage in candid conversations about how they use technology. After analyzing this data and compiling research on the way technology changes over time, I’ve boiled it all down to three fundamental ways in which a single, centralized business platform makes life better:

Centralization of tools doesn’t just stop with the actual products. With a single platform, you only have to pay for one sales expense, marketing expense, support expense, and operational expense. By combining technologies, we drastically cut overhead, and better spread cost. This is why we can provide lower price points to our customers.

Centralized platforms like Qebot also enable each tool to automatically connect on the backend (which we’ll talk more about later), meaning you don’t need to spend extra money on 3rd party systems to help you connect your website to your CRM, to your email marketing platform, to your social platform, yada, yada, yada. No need for expensive technical consultants to get your technology all set up for you. Just quick, easy setup from the start.

Qebot doesn’t believe in bundles, either. You purchase, activate and even cancel what you want when you want. We don’t think you should have to buy a specific tier to get that specific technology you need (plus three other systems you’ll never use). Our a la carte platform lets you shop and buy only what you need. Nothing more.

This one is simple. Everything is housed under one roof – you log in once and voila, instant access to all your programs. While it’s great that you won’t have to remember (or forget) a dozen different URL’s, usernames, and passwords, the real standout benefit is that all these programs talk to each other. You don’t have to load contacts in multiple places, hire a consultant to tell you what the numbers mean or help with integration – it’s already connected.

Another simple benefit is that you’ll have one itemized bill per month. With less accounting hassles, you can stop worrying about all those accounts you’re trying to reconcile for technology expenses.

Support is simple, too. One support channel for everything. This means you spend less time trying to find help so you can get back to work.

Hiring a new employee? Simply set up one user account and indicate the tools they’re allowed to access with a couple clicks. Did an employee just quit? Simply shut off access immediately with one click to “suspend” or “delete” the account. All done. No one wants ex-employees browsing around internal IP or customer insights and data because you forgot to shut off their access to a tool. Protecting what matters most has never been easier.

“So you’re saying that centralization of my digital tools will save me money, make managing technology a whole lot easier, AND that it will increase the performance of my marketing, sales, and operational strategies?” – Yes. That is exactly what I’m saying.

First off, with a platform like Qebot, you get the best of the best. These aren’t half-baked solutions, or cheap knock-offs.  These are partner technology companies who specialize in their fields. Our social media platform partner does only social media. Website builder – only builds websites and e-commerce. You are not settling here. These are the best systems on the market.

Secondly, with centralization you get the most out of your tools. Most business owners do not take the time, put in the investment, or even know how to connect all of the tools they may be using to help supercharge campaigns. Your website talking to your CRM, talking to your advertising system, which connects to your accounting?… These are deep integrations, happening automatically, and behind the scenes to make sure you get the very most out of each tool you purchase.

Finally, better data = better insights. With all your technology and data under one roof, you can dive deeper. Learn more about your customer base and become more strategic with your decision making. Plus, Qebot’s ability to glean insights from your industry, location, business model, etc., enables us to just continue to get better at automating the little tasks that help you drive revenue.

Software as a service (SaaS) is growing and evolving rapidly to help businesses become better at running and growing their companies. It allows for businesses to scale faster, better target their market, and build greater companies. But until Qebot, it’s been hard to get the most out of technology.

The time has come. Take hold of the tools you need to really manage your business. Get your technology in gear and advance to the next level.

Curious yet? Want to learn more? Sign up for a free account at Qebot.com, or schedule a demo.|||

