by Michael DeFelice / Behind The Scenes, Data Science, Service Delivery, Strategy / May 12, 2017 / Comments

We love our customers - especially when they have been growing with us over the years. I’ve spent many hours looking through data like this and it makes me proud to work for a company whose customers get continuous value from its products.

Some customers, however, and for various reasons, show recent periods of negative growth or a plateau in their storage growth. Obsessed with ensuring the best customer fit with our portfolio, we like to identify these anomalies and personally reach out to the customers.

The below is a simple example of identifying “at-risk” customers based on the trend of their last four months’s invoice amount (MRR). In future posts, I’ll explore other methods.

Populate a Pandas DataFrame with the results of a SQL query. In this case, the query returns a subset of line items from customer invoices along with classification tags. Note about 6.1M rows and 24 features (columns) returned.

A sample of the returned DataFrame is as follows. For this post, the interesting columns are cus (unique customer id), monc (last day of the month the invoice was created), and amount (total amount of the line item):

Since the above DataFrame represents the line items of an invoice, group by customer by month created - aggregating the amount field by sum.

Note how now each row can be represented as a series of monthly totals for a customer.

With Pandas, this is simple and is calculated relatively fast. After calculation, note the column names m (slope) and rsq (r-squared value)

Let’s start by targeting the top 10 customers with a negative MRR growth trend and r-squared value over 0.9.

It’s immensely important for a product company to continually ensure that its customers are receiving value from its products. Identifying anomalies in usage and appropriately reaching out to customers for feedback (and acting on this feedback) is key to long-term success.|||

We love our customers - especially when they have been growing with us over the years. I’ve spent many hours looking through data like this and it makes me p...