There are plenty of us out there who love to have a beautiful, shiny and above all else, clean looking car. One of the best ways to make sure that our rides look their best is with one of our amazing electric car covers, which are an inventive way to protect your car against the elements. However, even with your car protected, there comes a time when you need to get out there and clean it.

So, we have put together our top car cleaning tips for making sure that it looks it’s best, whether your electronic car cover is on or off.

There is no point spending all that time washing your car, if you are simply moving the dirt around. Instead, make sure that you give it a good old-fashioned hose down before you start to remove any surface dirt and debris. This not only makes it easier to clean, but will also protect your paintwork by not allowing the surface dirt to grind into your paints topcoat when you get out that sponge.

Use a good quality sponge to wash your car, along with a good wash or a wash and wax mix, in warm water. Make sure to lift up your wiper blades and give them a wipe and one thing many people forget is your windows. Dirt and grime will sit at the top of your windows that reside inside the doorframe, so wind down those windows and make sure you give them a wipe too.

We have all been there – you spend time washing your car with a good quality wash and wax, and then the sun beats down and leaves those dreaded water marks all over your beautifully clean paintwork. To avoid these marks, make sure you dry up the excess water from the paints surface with a natural leather chamois. The chamois needs to be damp before you start, so give it a quick rinse and sweep it across your car as soon as you have finished washing it.

Polish isn’t only a way to make sure that your car is sparkling and clean; it also offers protection for it too. Polish will create a protective barrier against things like dead bugs, bird droppings and even tree sap. You need to invest in a good quality polish and really take the time to concentrate on giving your car an all-round go-over, as this will make sure that it always looks its best.

One of the most noticeable things about a car that has been professionally cleaned is the tires. For the ultimate showroom finish, treat yourself to some tire shine. A quick spray around the tire walls, and a wipe off of the excess, will leave them a deep black colour and a high-gloss shine. Getting a professionally looking clean has never been so quick and easy.

One thing that is always hard to avoid, no matter how much we care for our cars, is a stone chip. Once your car is clean, spend sometime going over the bodywork and see if you can spot any chips. Those that have penetrated through the paint to the metal should be dealt with first, as these will cause the most damage. Repair and seal them with rust protector first and then touch them up with a touch-up pen. These can be purchased from many high street retailers and you can get an exact colour match using the correct colour code from the car manufacturers label.

A little final tip that we like to do after every major clean is to treat our ride to a new air freshener. The feeling of jumping in your car and taking it for a spin when it is clean on the outside is great, but having a nice smell on the inside can add that extra little touch of cleanliness.

So, there you have it, some of our top car cleaning tips. Of course, after putting all the effort into getting it looking great, it makes sense to keep it that way. This means that the best investment you could make is one of our electric car covers here at AirShroud – the simplest and most effective way to keep your car looking awesome!|||

We have put together our top car cleaning tips for making sure that it looks it’s best, whether your electronic car cover is on or off.