tl;dr: Groupthink can settle hurt product teams who all read the same blogs and white-papers. At Rentify, we perioidically ask non-technical members of our team to design landing pages in concert with our designers. We put them up against each other in a ‘winner stays on’ A/B test. Non-technical colleagues nearly always outperform technical folks. Below is some real world data from two recent tests.

Rentify’s product team is organised fairly typically, with a sprint which is a week in advance of our design sprint, and two weeks ahead of our engineering sprint. When we look at conversion through a particular landing page, we try to join the dots through the flow to pick out the key messages which help our customers trust us: from their search terms at the top of the funnel, through to the stories they tell us in surveying, and on the phone with our sales team.

Putting the key points we hear our customers talking about as ‘anchors’ in our landing pages is a great way of improving them, but there’s real latency in the process of listening to calls, talking to salespeople, and discussing what we think the priorities are for the page.

One way we combat this is to tap our non-technical team members for entire landing page designs. Once per quarter (ish), we’ll take a landing page somewhere in our funnel, and run a ‘winner stays on’ competition which is open to the entire company. Each week, a new colleague gets an hour to work with a designer to build version of a landing page, which is then put up against the previous week’s champion. At the end of the test, the winner gets a prize (currently £100, which isn’t bad for an hour’s work).

Here are two real life examples of the results: from the last time we ran it, in Q4, and our current test, which isn’t yet finished.

It’s worth noting that Week 1 in each of these examples is the output of our product team thinking really hard about the success criteria for the page, so it’s really important that we operate with no ego when it comes to seeing our work bettered. (A few of us get a little competitive and want to check and double check that our office IP address was filtered from the tests, but we’re always happyish when someone beats us if it means the company is doing better 😬)

We have lots of theories about why this method is an effective way of improving landing pages.

We’re really pleased with how this system works for us, and we’re currently thinking about ways to improve it for the next quarter. If you’ve got a novel or unexpected way of gathering feedback from your teams and customers to help optimise for conversion, I’d love to hear from you.

Useful links: Jamie’s article on Signals v. Noise; Jen Cardello on macro vs. micro conversion optimisation.|||

tl;dr: Groupthink can settle hurt product teams who all read the same blogs and white-papers. At Rentify, we perioidically ask non-technical members of our team to design landing pages in concert…