STUFF YOU MAY LIKE

Affiliate marketing continues to grow as the internet becomes consumer’s favourite place shop for deals. People are searching for deals on certain products and services, and where do they go?

According to the survey highlighted on Fortune.com, consumers are now buying more things online than in stores.

According to results of the survey, shoppers now make 51% of their purchases online, compared to 48% in 2015 and 47% in 2014.

This trend has also influenced top brands to shut down some of their branches and focus wholly on online shopping.

This is not a bad trend for affiliate marketing at all. Now, there is an opportunity for affiliate marketers to make more money through their affiliate links.

In short, 2017 is going to be a big year for affiliate marketing as more consumers troupe to the internet to do their shopping rather than from the shop.

How do you boost your affiliate marketing success in 2017? Are you planning to cash in on the popularity of online shopping in the new year?

So are you ready to make your affiliate marketing strategy even more successful in 2017? If you are ready, below are 4 smart ways you can easily take your affiliate marketing business to the next level:

Expand your partnerships in the new year by signing up for more affiliates. The fact is that most of the top-earning affiliate marketers have a wide range of partnerships and advertisers. So, don’t focus on just one partnership or affiliate program, sign up for as many as possible.

However, in your quest to improve your affiliate earnings in 2017, don’t neglect the most important thing which is quality products. Make sure that the products and services you are selling are of great value to your audience.

Everything is not about money, quality matters in affiliate marketing business. Quality products will offer better feedback that can easily become your marketing weapon. Regularly check for new advertisers and affiliate deals you can promote but never sign up for partnerships because of the money you want to make.

Social media has revolutionised not only how people communicate and socialise online but also how consumers discover new products to buy. Social media platforms such as Pinterest, Instagram and Facebook are particularly good for products discovery, and you will not want to miss out at all.

If you want to get more people and potential buyers to see your content – with your embedded affiliate links, you have to use social media more than ever. The fact is that there are no other powerful tools to help your content go viral and to build relationships with visitors than social media.

You should learn how to leverage social media and millions of its active users. You can leverage active following from Twitter, Facebook, Pinterest and Instagram for maximum awareness, visibility and exposure. Do you know that Pinterest recently announced in one of its blog posts that it now allows affiliate marketers to embed affiliate links? Please read our previous article on how to easily make money on Pinterest with affiliate marketing links.

You can also do more with visual marketing in the new year. In fact, this is one of the best means to effectively ‘seduce’ your audience and get them interested in what you are selling.

“Visual content is one of the most effective ways to breathe life into marketing.”

The fact is that visual marketing tends to offer far better results, and if you don’t want your competitors to outperform you, it’s high time you used it more in your affiliate marketing business.

Please read our article on why visual content should be part of your marketing strategy for better understanding.

There are so many great visual content marketing tools out there that you can use to create valuable infographics and video content to reach more audience and improve engagements.

Also, you can create tutorial videos on how certain products work or you can come up with product review videos. Another thing you can do is to create and share videos of your favourite products. With your affiliate links embedded, you stand a better chance to improve on your affiliate earnings because video content can easily go viral.

Email marketing is not dead yet, in fact email marketing still relevant and stylishly thriving today. However, if you want to get favourably better results from your marketing emails, you have to ensure they are relevant and valuable to your audience.

“The good thing about email marketing is that it doesn’t cost much and it offers some really good results.”

Another thing is that you have to make sure that your marketing emails get to the relevant audience. This is the only way you can be able to make earn money through your embedded affiliate links.

If people find your content interesting, they will be encouraged to click on your affiliate links.

Also, they might be able to find something to purchase via your links as a result. It’s advisable to focus on quality content and your newsletters will become a converting channel.

Grow your email contact lists – you can even grow your email lists through social media. Put time and effort into it, and optimise your content. You may not see the improvement immediately but it will help your overall performance.|||

How to boost your affiliate marketing success rates. New year resolutions for affiliate marketing success. Best affiliate marketing tips for publishers