If photography is the passion of your life, then getting an external flash for Canon becomes an indispensable accessory for you. A good canon flash gives you additional light when the surrounding get too dark, help achieve balanced exposure in the daytime, and allows the freezing of fast-moving subjects. Apart from this Canon external flash gives an artistic feel to the images in almost any light conditions. If you are looking for a beginner or expert, check out our list of six best flashes for Canon

Best External Flash for Canon Available Online

Neewer TT560 Flash Speedlite has received great reviews online as this external flash for Canon comes with eight manual power settings, three triggering modes, PC sync socket, built-in reflection board and wide angle diffuser.

The Speedlite 430EX II is a canon flash powered with a Guide Number of 43 that works best for suitable telephoto lens shooting and bounce flash. Canon Speedlite 430EX II comes with 24-105mm auto zoom head and a 14mm wide-panel diffuser that gives you a flash coverage when you are working on a full range of shooting situations. This flash is powered by 4 x AA batteries, yet the flash is lightweight, compact and portable to carry anywhere in the camera bag.

Voted as the best flash for canon, the Altura Photo AP-UNV1 DSLR Camera Flash Speedlite fulfills all the photography expectation. It comes with remote triggers for easy operations; this flash offers you lot of photography options at a pocket-friendly price.

Yongnuo YN 560 III is the latest version of the very popular YN-560 series of manual flash units. This updated YN560 IV comes 2.4 GHz wireless radio receiver, has a zoom range of 24-105mm that can be expanded to 18 mm with the built-in wide-angle diffuser. Get the full bounce and swivel lighting by moving unit to -7 to 90-degree tilt and 270-degree of rotation Yongnuo YN 560 III flash runs on 4 AA batteries with recycle time of approximately 3 seconds.

Canon Speedlite 430EX III-RT is a compatible Canon external flash with guide number 43 and gives coverage for focal lengths from 24 to 105 mm. The recycling time between flashes lies between 0.1 to 3.5 seconds, but it depends on the power level of the battery. A fully charged battery can give minimum 200 flashes and maximum 1400 flashes. The unit also has infrared AF assist lamp, radio control for flash, ten custom functions and an adjustable head that can tilt to +90 degrees and rotated by 180 degrees.

YONGNUO YN560 IV Wireless Flash Speedlite is a mix of the two previous products YN-560 III and YN560-TX. The Canon flash is made with a built-in wireless trigger system so that one can use it as a flash Speedlite and as flash controller Transmitter. It also has three independent groups, detecting remote control the flash mode, focal length, and flash output.

AmazonBasics Electronic Flash is compatible with all kind of DSLR Cameras and helps in getting great photos even in low-light situations. It has three flash modes: Manual mode, Slave mode 1, and Slave mode 2.

How to pick external flash for Canon?

If you are a novice in photography looking out for best flash for Canon to improve the quality of shots, then there are few things you should keep in mind before paying for the product. While most of the DSLRs come with built in a flash, they don’t produce an adequate amount of light to get a clear picture.

While choosing the flashlight, decide on what kind of photos you are required to take. As per your need, you can sort the flash and then determine the amount of money you can spend on it. There is high-end flash available, but for beginners, it’s advisable to go cheaper version with a limited feature. This will help you get adjusted using the flashlight and learn the essential features quickly. If you have mastered all the basic features of using the flash, then check the main features of the flashlight.

The first thing to see is the guide number which defines the size of the flash. If you want portrait effect in your photos, then pick one that comes with different flash size. Another point is flash sync that is a camera function. The flash can limit shutter speed of a camera, so use on that comes with higher sync speed that will help in handling the camera with ease. Recycle rate in a flash comes when you are shooting an action scene. In this, the recharge goes flash is important as you want it to be ready to use for next shot. So, your flash should hold a good recycle rate if you want a clear picture of moving subject.

The best way to upgrade your Canon camera is by using an external flash that will help you take great pictures in low light, shoot moving subjects and have features that will help you click portrait-like photos with a click.|||

If you are having a Canon DSLR, then you may be looking for a good compatible external flash for it. Get the best Canon flash from the list here.