Thanks to my apparent inability to use imgur properly, in my attempts to write this update I somehow fucked up my original post so I've deleted it! The short version is that for the last year I've been dating an amazing woman, a few nights ago she invited me to have dinner with her parents. First time I'd ever met them, in theory, but it turned out that her dad was the man who abused me as a kid. From the ages of 8-11 he was my piano teacher and I was subjected to frequent sexual abuse for the duration of those three years, only stopping when my family moved to another city. This is the update. So first things first, I will be going to the police. I'm in the UK so technically there is no statute of limitations on offences of this kind. That doesn't mean that anything will come of it, but there's more of a chance than there would be in most American states. Next, yesterday evening involved the crappiest conversation of my life. Sat down and told my girlfriend everything. Pretty predictably the reaction was one of shock, disgust and a great deal of sympathy, but not a great deal of actual talking because quite frankly what the hell do you say when that revelation is made! However at one point she did come out with a line that had me in fucking stitches, and I'm sure that a lot of you will think this is pretty offensive but at the time it just did so much to lighten the mood when she blurted out "let's go buy a lottery ticket because what are the fucking odds!". Anyway, the long and the short of it is that no we're not splitting up, she wants absolutely nothing at all to do with him from this moment on, at some point in the next few weeks we are both going to speak to her mum to make her aware of what kind of monster he is. Now to respond to some of the questions that were being asked most commonly: How do I know that my gf wasn't abused by him too? - He is her step-dad and she was an adult who had moved out of the family home before he even met her mother. How did I not realise who he was based on my gf's surname? - See above, he's her step-dad and as a result she never adopted his surname. Have you considered seeing a therapist about this? - I have, for a number of years I was undergoing therapy and right now I'm happy and healthy, living in a place I love and working a job that I love. And quite possibly the question that was asked the most: Did you at least get good at the piano? - Strangely, yes! A couple of years after moving I started to play again and I self taught myself up to Grade 8 before stopping. So I think that's about it for now. Thanks for the numerous messages of support I received after my first post, and even thanks for the nasty messages because honestly I find people attempting to be “internet tough guys” incredibly amusing. Peace out.|||

Post with 14110 votes and 431154 views. Shared by wouldntyaliketoknow. Well that certainly made dinner awkward - The Update