Huawei is ready to extend their Nova series by releasing the Nova 2 and Nova 2 Plus as the successors of their Nova and Nova Plus. Both the Nova 2 and Nova 2 Plus were recently spotted on the TENAA listing, revealing their noteworthy details and outlook. And today, the official promo posters of the new phones have been leaked.

With the new leak surfaced online, the launch date for the duo has been tipped off as well. The poster reveals that Huawei has scheduled to, officially debut the Nova 2 on May 26th, at their event. Interestingly, the leaked poster also hints that, the company is going to unveil more than one device on the same date. Therefore, we could also expect that the Nova 2 Plus, will also be unveiled alongside.

Look at the poster, do you have any idea, on what the Chinese words in it, say? Well, we are here to help you, as we worked out the translation. The promotional slogan reads that the device is the best one for shooting selfies and surely a, big revolution for its value.

As of now, TENNA had listed out some of the design aspects, specs and features of the devices; let’s have a look on it. Both the devices flaunts a metal body, while in the rear side, the handsets are adorned with dual cameras and a fingerprint sensor. Under the hood, the devices are powered by Qualcomm’s Snapdragon 660 processor.

On the specs wise, the Nova 2 sports a 5.1-inch display, whereas the Nova 2 plus will come with a 5.5-inch display. It is also told that, its 3000mAh battery, supports 18W fast charging support. On the software front, the duo will run on Android 7.0 Nougat OS, which is wrapped-up with the Huawei’s Emotion User Interface (EMUI).

Please take the aforementioned information as a grain of salt. Even though it is an official poster, Huawei haven’t made any official statement about the event in China, until the moment. However let’s hope that they will soon see the light of the day.|||

The official promotional poster of Huawei Nova 2 and Nova 2 Plus leaked out and revealed the launch date. The phone come with dual camera, fingerprint and