The statusline in Vim is the bar along the bottom of the Vim window. By default it does not show when you open Vim until there is more than one window. The statusline is intended to give you information about the status of a buffer with the default statusline including the path, permissions, line and a percentage representation of where you are in the file. For many people the default behaviour of vim is enough and you can get on with your life without having to configure anything.

The statusline can be shown regardless of whether you have more than one buffer open with the following setting in your .

Similarly it may be disabled entirely if you never want to see it.

A very basic statusline can be achieved by adding the following to the file.

First ensure that the status bar is enabled all the time.

Reload Vim and a not so useful hello world status bar will show.

A useful pattern to use when building a statusline is to concatenate the line and build the statusline over multiple lines in your

This makes the statusline easier to read when building and maintaining it.

Statuslines can use Vim functions and it is possible to show anything that can be programmed in Vimscript in the statusline. This might be the weather, the price of ETH or more commonly the git branch that you are on. The following returns the current branch and an empty string if there is no git repository.

This function can then be used in a statusline.

Vim has a number of variables that may be used in status lines. The character for example shows the path to the file in the buffer and the vim documentation outlines clearly the data that can be shown.

Colour is perhaps the hardest part to configure in statuslines. The documentation is harder to decipher here but offers the highlight colour names that may be used to change the colour of the statusline. These colors are named highlights so it is difficult to understand what the colour will be without playing around with them. The syntax for using these colors is as follows.

After reading the documentation and understanding how statuslines work it was easy to construct a statusline that works for me.

Of course it may be easier for many people to use powerline or airline. Personally 18 lines of code is enough to have a working statusline and I have one fewer dependency.

Have an update or suggestion for this article? You can edit it here and send me a pull request.|||

Statuslines in Vim are not hard to create. Making your own means one less dependency in your life.