Scrollbars are one of the critical elements of the browser UI that lets us access information that’s out of view. As such CSS has steadfastly refused to yield much in the way of letting developers style their appearance. Using JavaScript, however, the sky becomes in the limit, by replacing the scrollbar UI with a custom one. Critics of custom scrollbars argue against making any drastic changes to such an essential and familiar interface, though in my opinion that thinking is outdated. Can you imagine Facebook on desktop with the native, ugly scrollbar instead of the slim, non intrusive scrollbar that shows up only when you hover over the status feed? In this post I’ll detail 7 of the best, free custom scrollbar JavaScript and jQuery Plugins in 2017 you can use to completely replace the default browser scrollbar without sacrificing browser performance or usability across different devices.

SimpleBar a performant vertical custom scrollbar JavaScript that uses the browser’s native scroll mechanics when scrolling, and merely shows a custom scrollbar over the native UI. It disables itself on mobile and device with “floating” scrollbars (macbook trackpad for example) where it’s not needed.

In a nutshell: Good script to use if you only need vertical custom scrollbars and modern browsers support (IE11+).

Perfect Scrollbar may not be perfect, but it’s getting there. This JavaScript lets you add a custom scrollbar to scrollable elements on the page (except the BODY element) when you hover over it. Designed to be as unobtrusive as possible, it doesn’t alter the target container’s original styles in any way, simply adding a custom scrollbar over it. Any changes to the container’s dimensions are automatically accounted for (great for responsive design).

In a nutshell: Excellent all around custom scrollbar for most users. Fires many scroll related events for developers. CDN version available for fast deployment.

Malihu supports vertical/horizontal scrollbars, scrolling momentum, plus mouse-wheel, keyboard and touch response. It comes with several themes to easily experiment with different looks. A browser pleaser, the plugin works across a wide array of browsers, including IE8. It does however, require jQuery to work.

In a nutshell: Requires jQuery 1.6. Lots of ready to use themes out of the box for those looking to differentiate their custom scrollbar easily. Comes with lots of scroll events and actions for developers.

jQuery scrollbar is easy to implement and comes with a whole laundry list of features. Two noteworthy features are that the custom scrollbar can be positioned outside the target container (see screenshot), and also added to textareas (which a lot of its peers don’t support). It also comes with extensive legacy IE7+ browsers support, if you need that kind of thing.

In a nutshell: Requires jQuery. Scrollbars can be displayed outside scroll container, and also used to replace a form TEXTAREA’s scrollbar. Legacy IE browsers support.

NiceScroll 3 is a not so subtle custom scrollbar that comes with a boatload of options to fine tune how it should behave on desktop and mobile browsers. It is one of the only JavaScripts that advertise its ability to replace the main document scrollbar, on top of iframes and textareas, for those that really want to go all out. It also comes with an unique “zoom” feature that lets users expand the scrolling container to fill the whole page for easy reading.

In a nutshell: jQuery required. Can replace the main document scrollbar for those looking to do that. Scrollable content can expand to fill entire page by clicking on a control.

Baron is a small custom scrollbar script that uses native scrolling for optimal performance, and can be nested as well. Vertical, horizontal and bidirectional scroll are supported, and CSS can be used to fully customize its look. Like most of the custom scrollbars we list here, Baron just hides the system scrollbar without removing it. This guarantees scrolling will work on any system.

In a nutshell: Can be added to hidden containers, and also nested. With plugin headers can become fixed once user scrolls past them.

Last but not least, for those working with the React JavaScript Library, React Custom Scrollbars is one of the best integrated, React centric custom scrollbar for your web apps. Installation is via npm package manager with a module bundler like Webpack or Browserify to consume CommonJS modules.

In a nutshell: Our top choice for a clean, React based custom scrollbar that works both on the client and server end.

Facebook gave the entire web design community the go ahead when it started using custom scrollbars on its status feed UI. Modern day custom scrollbars maintain a similar level of scrolling experience as their native counterpart while finally letting us modify their look to blend in with our page’s design and aesthetics. Function and design can finally come together with custom scrollbar scripts.|||

7 best, free JavaScript Custom Scrollbars you can use to replace the native browser scrollbar inside your webpages to overhaul the user experience.