The U.S. Air Force has revealed that a parts mix up and a hasty decision to try and remedy the situation led to millions of dollars in damage to America’s most important aircraft, Air Force One. Boeing thankfully located the problem before a more serious accident occurred on the ground or in flight, but the accident was a direct result of serious problems at the aircraft manufacturer's maintenance facility. Between April 1 and 10, 2016, contract maintenance personnel used contaminated tools and replacement parts while servicing the oxygen system on one of the Air Force’s two VC-25A aircraft at the Boeing Global Support Services’ site in San Antonio, Texas. VC-25A is the official designation for the pair of specially modified 747-200 aircraft the Air Force has on hand specifically to fly the President of the United States, their staff, and other accompanying press and dignitaries, wherever they might need to go. Popularly known as Air Force One, the planes are uniquely configured to allow the president of the United States to conduct their full range of duties safely and securely while airborne, even during a nuclear attack.

“To prevent a fire hazard, the VC-25A Aircraft Maintenance Manual (AMM) requires all tools and components used on the [mishap aircraft’s] oxygen systems to be ‘oxygen clean’ so contaminants do not exceed specified levels prior to oxygen system maintenance,” an executive summary of the report explained. You can read that brief review here. What this means is that when working on Air Force One’s oxygen system, repair crews must make sure to use a special process to scrub any potentially dangerous chemicals from both spare parts and anything they use to manipulate them. Though not flammable by itself, oxygen is a powerful accelerant. It can also cause other powerful chemical reactions. Contaminating the sealed system could potentially lead to a fire, which could in turn quickly get out of control as it feeds on the oxygen inside.

The use of contaminated parts forced Boeing to replace significant portions of the oxygen system for safety reasons. The price tag for the repairs was over $4 million, which the Chicago-headquartered plane maker paid for in the end. In Pentagon parlance, the most severe accidents, called Class A mishaps, are ones that cause $2 million or more in damage or result in a fatality. The summary report says that incident began when one mechanic mistakenly gave contaminated items to co-worker, who ultimately noticed the problem. Instead of stopping work and reporting the incident, the second individual, along with a third, located the problematic components, then attempted to clean them using a quick, ad hoc procedure. The second mechanic then put everything back together on the VC-25A. The summary does not include the names of any of the individuals involved in the mishap. The full accident report notes that objects can become contaminated in the open air within two to five minutes, according to Air Force Times. After crews complete this kind of work, they need to put any unused items or tools through the cleaning procedures again before sealing them in an airtight container. The contamination to the rest of the system could have occurred when the parts were connected in the first place or when the mechanics reinstalled the improperly cleaned components the second time around.|||

Three Boeing employees failed to follow the rules and created a dangerous fire hazard.