As a digital marketer, your aim is to add more customers to your database, and earn revenue without spending too much. Right? Well, all this requires quite a lot of hard work, and involves growth hacking to conduct experiments until you get the desired results.

Before trying growth hacking techniques, you must analyze two things – your objective and personas. Besides reaching out to a wider set of people, what else are you aiming at? Like, 20% growth in web traffic in the next 6 months. Now that is an objective.

To target the right audiences, create personas and build your campaigns around them. Once you are clear with these two things, it is time for the next big step. And that is the implementation of growth hacking.

The growth hacking journey is divided into four primary stages:

Design a strategy encouraging your target audience to buy your product, or at least subscribe to your emails. Keep trying until you find the hack to make them behave the way you want.

For example, Twitter discovered that a user following ten accounts is likely to come back. So Twitter encouraged their users to follow 10-50 people, and suggested names of celebrities and other interesting people.

Once they are signed up to your email list, the next step is to engage them. Reach out to your target customers, and design campaigns that persuade them to act. And, this includes:

You can’t expect everyone to be an advocate of your company, but at least 10 percent of people can be if your product resonates with them. Make use of leverage, and let your users network for you. Then reward people who are promoting your company, product, content, etc. Like, PayPal used to pay $5 for every referral.

The last and the most crucial phase is to make sure the customers are coming back to you for repeated sales.

Continue designing campaigns involving the above 3 steps, and add more new customers to your list. Meanwhile, keep track of what tactics work, and use them again in your future strategies. This will help you build a community that will further assist you in promoting your products, and earning revenue.

Have a look at this gifographic by Evolve!, and you will get to know about the growth hacking model in detail.|||

Growth hacking is a process of rapid experiment across different marketing channels to identify the most effective and efficient ways to grow a business.