The following 7 Python books are based on a diversity of topics on Stackoverflow. While posts like these are often closed on Stackoverflow, they often provide good recommendations, and we would like to bring them to your attention by sharing them here. Have fun reading them!

Python Essential Reference (3rd Edition)

 Python Essential Reference, 3rd Edition, is a comprehensive reference to the Python programming language. Beazley’s Python Essential Reference, Second Edition will serve as a capable and exceptionally competent guide to current Python syntax and library modules. (This material can even help you build custom Python modules.

Python Essential Reference (4th Edition)

 Python Essential Reference is the definitive reference guide to the Python programming language — the one authoritative handbook that reliably untangles and explains both the core Python language and the most essential parts of the Python library. 6 and Python 3, the fourth edition of Python Essential Reference is the definitive guide for programmers who need to modernize existing Python code or who are planning an eventual migration to Python 3. Programmers starting a new Python project will find detailed coverage of contemporary Python programming idioms.

Programming in Python 3: A Complete Introduction to the Python Language

 Now, leading Python programmer Mark Summerfield demonstrates how to write code that takes full advantage of Python 3’s features and idioms. The first book written from a completely “Python 3” viewpoint, Programming in Python 3 brings together all the knowledge you need to write any program, use any standard or third-party Python 3 library, and create new library modules of your own. Summerfield draws on his many years of Python experience to share deep insights into Python 3 development you won’t find anywhere else.

Python Cookbook

 Updated for Python 2. 4, The Python Cookbook, 2nd Edition offers a wealth of useful code for all Python programmers, not just advanced practitioners. Like its predecessor, the new edition provides solutions to problems that Python programmers face everyday.

Python: Visual QuickStart Guide (2nd Edition)

 Python is a remarkably powerful dynamic programming language that is used in a wide variety of application domains such as Web, database access, desktop GUIs, game and software development, and network programming. The language itself is a flexible powerhouse that can handle practically any application domain. This task-based tutorial is for students with no programming experience as well as those programmers who have some experience with the programming language and now want to take their skills to the next level.

Python Pocket Reference (Pocket Reference (O’Reilly))

 With its convenient, quick-reference format, Python Pocket Reference, 3rd Edition is the perfect on-the-job reference. Python 2. The Python Pocket Reference, 3rd Edition serves as the perfect companion to Learning Python and Programming Python.

Learning Python, 3rd Edition

 With this hands-on book, you can master the fundamentals of the core Python language quickly and efficiently, whether you’re new to programming or just new to Python. This book covers: Types and Operations — Python’s major built-in object types in depth: numbers, lists, dictionaries, and more Statements and Syntax — the code you type to create and process objects in Python, along with Python’s general syntax model Functions — Python’s basic procedural tool for structuring and reusing code Modules — packages of statements, functions, and other tools organized into larger components Classes and OOP — Python’s optional object-oriented programming tool for structuring code for customization and reuse Exceptions and Tools — exception handling model and statements, plus a look at development tools for writing larger programs. Learning Python gives you a deep and complete understanding of the language that will help you comprehend any application-level examples of Python that you later encounter.|||

