

 A significant number of tech employees responded to a recent anonymous SFMTA survey seeking to determine possible locations for new tech-shuttle hubs that would decrease the impact the much maligned shuttles have on neighborhoods and Muni bus stops. And many of these commuters are threatening to give up using the shuttles and just drive or carpool if they don't stop just steps from their doorsteps as they do now. Those of us who still have to suffer the occasional indignities of regular public transit, though, probably don't have sympathy for these concerns, and in a data dump from the survey provided to SFist Tuesday, we have the IP addresses of many of the respondents — who probably, as tech employees, should have known the responses wouldn't be 100 percent anonymous in that regard.

The survey, which closed to public responses on Monday, asked for location suggestions for potential shuttle hubs as well as allowed for open-ended responses. In addition to logging this data, the survey also recorded the IP addresses, zip codes, and cities of residence for respondents (even the latitude and longitude of some). That information, correlated with a time-stamp of the survey completion, gives us a pretty good idea of who filled out the survey while sitting at their Facebook, Google, or Apple desks.

The idea of the hubs, that the 125 tech-shuttle stops should be done away with and in their place the city should create consolidated pickup/drop-off spots where all tech buses converge, is understandably controversial — imagine buying an apartment or signing an expensive lease with the location of your company's shuttle stop as a deciding factor. The creation of the hubs, and the removal of your shuttle stop, would certainly impact your commute, even if only by a few minutes on each end.

And so, while many of the more than 1,000 survey respondents politely suggested locations for hubs, others took another approach. Let's dive in (emphases added).

So, obviously, commuters don't want their commutes to change. The only problem is that critics of the system from the get-go have pointed to the direct impacts shuttle stops have on rising rents and gentrification in some neighborhoods, and how the shuttles create a caste system in which employees at certain companies are exempt from having to ever use public transit, and are thereby disinvested as residents in its improvement — and is it really going to ruin so many lives if people have to hop on a Muni bus or a bike to go a few blocks further to catch their shuttles? Those who couldn't afford shuttle-adjacent apartments already do this anyway, and the fact is, all these people chose to commute rather than locate themselves closer to their jobs. (Plus, we already know that even with the shuttle program as-is, many SF-based Facebook employees have been gunning to get the company to let them work in the city and stop all this commuting.)

Either way, we now have some first-person insight as to how employees at three major Silicon Valley tech companies feel on the issue. And while the companies avoided an environmental-impact appeal on the shuttle program earlier this year, an array of public comments at the time drove the SFMTA to pledge to look into creating hubs, and to studying the impacts shuttles have had on housing costs.

It's unclear when the SFMTA will be formally considering the issue based on the survey findings.

Previously: Here's How People Responded When SFMTA Asked Where To Put Tech-Shuttle 'Hubs'

 Facebook Employees Actually Hate Commuting, Beg For SF Office|||

