Many countries in the developing world are undergoing a technological revolution which is shaping how they tackle problems around infrastructure, health, education and finance. Young people are at the forefront of developing solutions to the problems in the developing world. These young people creating technology and businesses to foster innovation and growth.

Countries in the Middle East are no exception to this. Despite the difficulties the region faces such as the wars in Syria and Yemen, its populations are well-informed, plugged in and are using technology to build the future of their societies.

In the book Startup Rising published in 2013, Washington D.C.- and New York City-based entrepreneur and venture investor Chris Schroeder wrote about how the rest of the world, especially the West, needed to wake up to what was happening in the Middle East. In today’s episode, Chris talks to Carl Mungazi about what he has seen throughout his travels in the Middle East. He discusses the successes and challenges faced by the entrepreneurs who shared their stories with him and what this means for those watching in the West.

Transcript provided by We Edit Podcasts. Software Engineering Daily listeners can go to weeditpodcasts.com/sed to get 20% off the first two months of audio editing and transcription services. Thanks to We Edit Podcasts for partnering with SE Daily. Please click here to view this show’s transcript.



 Oracle Dyn provides DNS that is as dynamic and intelligent as your applications. Dyn DNS gets your users to the right cloud service, CDN, or data center, using intelligent response to steer traffic based on business policies, as well as real-time internet conditions, like the security and performance of the network path. Get started with a free 30-day trial for your application by going to .  After the free trial, Dyn’s developer plans start at just $7 a month for world-class DNS. Rethink DNS. Go to dyn.com/sedaily  to learn more and get your free trial of Dyn DNS. 





 Do you want the flexibility of a non-relational key value store together with the query capabilities of SQL? Take a look at c-treeACE by FairCom. c-treeACE is a non-relational key-value store that offers ACID transactions complemented by a full SQL engine. c-treeACE offers simultaneous access to the data through non-relational and relational APIs. Companies use c-treeACE to process ACID transactions through non-relational APIs for extreme performance while using the SQL APIs to connect third-party apps or query the data for reports or business intelligence. c-treeACE is platform- and hardware-agnostic, and is capable of being embedded, deployed on premises, or in the cloud. Software Engineering Daily listeners can download an evaluation version of c-treeACE for free at



 Incapsula can protect your API servers and microservices from responding to unwanted requests. To try Incapsula for yourself, go to and get a month of Incapsula free. Incapsula’s API gives you control over the security and performance of your application–whether you have a complex microservices architecture or a WordPress site, like Software Engineering Daily. Incapsula has a global network of over 30 data centers that optimize routing and cache your content. The same network of data centers that are filtering your content for attackers are operating as a CDN, and speeding up your application. To try Incapsula today, go to 

|||

