William Mougayar is the author of "The Business Blockchain" and a board advisor to, and investor in, various blockchain projects and startups (see: disclosures). On 25th May, 2017, he is organizing the Token Summit in New York, a one-day event discussing in-depth the token economy.

In this opinion piece, Mougayar lists his ultimate 18 web resources for those wanting to research, track or launch initial coin offerings or ICOs.

Despite some regulatory uncertainties and cautiousness, the ICO space is developing at a rapid pace. ICOs are just one application of the token-based models that blockchains enable.

How do you keep track of the various ICOs that are being planned and launched?

A flurry of websites and businesses are emerging to track, analyze, manage, and offer services to help market, plan, develop or launch ICOs.

I recently went on a hunt to gather the various resources that list them. The result offers an eye-opening expedition into this burgeoning phenomenon.

With Ambisafe you can quickly issue any type of asset on the blockchain, and add it to cryptocurrency exchanges worldwide.

The best projects and ICO crowdfundings. It only lists the projects it considers worth following and investing.

CryptoCompare is an interactive platform where you can discuss the latest crypto trends and monitor all markets in real time.

Blog that posts commentary on several new ICOs.

Gives spotlight to new crypto projects with a focus on crowdfunding methodology. Also says it conducts due diligence to ascertain viability of these projects.

ICOrating specializes in evaluating companies that are planning an ICO. Its analysis seems thorough and objective, reviewing companies as potential investment objects.

PrivateMarket Technologies enable wealth managers to access, analyse and execute primary and secondary market transactions online.

TokenMarket is a marketplace for tokens, digital assets and blockchain based investing. Users can research and invest in tokenized assets, or launch a crowdsale for a project.

Maintains a curated list of ongoing and upcoming cryptocurrency ICOs, token sales, and crowdsales. Projects are evaluated for listing using multiple criteria, but in general, they list ICOs that should raise the equivalent of $30,000 or are unique in some way. Provides summaries and commentary for select ICOs. Listing or research is not considered an endorsement.

Have I missed others that should be included? Please add what you have in the comments, or suggest it in this Google Sheet.

This article was previously published on Startup Management and has been republished here with permission.

Disclaimer: The views expressed in this article are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the views of, and should not be attributed to, CoinDesk.|||

