This just in: Cisco announces intent to purchase AppDynamics for $3.7 billion. Congrats AppDynamics team!

While this is definitely a great success for AppDynamics as a company, it is also an emphatic testament to the enormous importance customers are putting on health and performance of their digital businesses. Combined between AppDynamics and New Relic (latest market cap ~$1.95B), there is more than $5 billion of market potential for application performance monitoring. And here is the best part, we are actually on the cusp of an even more powerful shift in the demands for application monitoring and more broadly application operations.

 When AppDynamics and New Relic started in 2008, developers were a greatly underserved segment in terms of monitoring tools. The rusty monitoring products from early 2000s were built for traditional IT teams, focused on infrastructure level metrics and were completely unsuitable for developer needs. Developers were the perfect customer segment. Even the market timing to target developers was perfect with the imminent shift of power to developers in early part of this decade. So, in hindsight, the founders of AppDynamics showed great vision, brilliant execution and tremendous milestone with the Cisco acquisition.

But history tends to repeat itself and does so more rapidly in the technology sector. The core techniques which are the foundation of both New Relic and AppDynamics are already starting to look like their antiquated predecessors. At the heart of their APM solutions, is the technique of code-instrumentation; specifically, byte-code instrumentation of run-time interpreted languages such as Java, .Net, etc. Developers can also explicitly wrap their code with additional metrics that can help trace transaction flows. But this critical dependency on code-level metrics is terribly unsuitable for applications of today and tomorrow. Here are the fundamental reasons why:

In short, the needs of application monitoring have evolved already. At Netsil, we have developed a fundamentally new approach for application monitoring that doesn’t require any code change. Specifically, the Netsil Application Operations Center (AOC) delivers:

Once again we’d like to congratulate the AppDynamics team. They have paved the path for many to follow. Already, changes in modern applications demand a fundamentally new approach that is service-oriented, doesn’t require code changes and addresses the needs of operations teams.

Netsil is the pioneer among those addressing the new challenges for health, performance and reliability of modern applications. We would love to engage with you and usher in the new era of agile operations to keep pace with your rapidly growing digital business needs. Learn more at Netsil|||

Cisco announces intent to purchase AppDynamics for $3.7 billion. Congrats AppDynamics team!