For 3 years I have run a blog where I publish only infographics and make money only with infographics. My co-founder Mark and I made them all ourselves. Our most popular infographics get 500,000 views per year each. We used to make them by hand, but now we use Adioma, our infographic maker, to create them at least 30 times faster (more on that later). But it wasn’t until we figured out a methodology for making money on infographics that we got all this traffic. In a nutshell, it looks like this.

Now I will tell you exactly how we make money with infographics. Why? Because I am a visual learner, so I want the world to be more visual. If you create even one infographic after reading this article, I will consider my life a life well-lived.

The first step is the most important – find a need. You came here to read my article because you have a need. Now think how many other people have their own needs. You can be the one who will fill their needs through infographics, at scale. The more needs you fill and the better you do it, the more money you make.

Information is the new oil. To make money, mine the world for valuable information, extract the insights, then refine them into consumable infographics. The better your refining process, the more money you make “per barrel”.

The short answer is as much as you want. I ran experiments on my blog where I published only 60 infographics. Here are stats from my monthly revenue per revenue stream and per item.

As you can see, the first 3 categories are highly scalable. The more infographics you make, the more affiliate links to books you can insert. Let’s say one links generates $61/month. With a blog of 100 infographics. That’s already $6,100/month.

Ads are also scalable. With 100 infographics and a high click through rate, which is within your control since you are the one who decides which audience to target your infographics towards, you could be making $1,000-$10,000. A good click-through rate is considered around 2%. Mine is 0.2% because I target audiences to want to read about startups but don’t necessarily have a startup to buy services for. If you target the audience that wants to read and buy, you will make more money.

Here is a snapshot of a month of ad revenue.

Book illustration licenses come as a steady stream as your blog grows. The narrower the topic, the more likely you will be contacted by the same publisher multiple times.

Unsurprisingly, the most money is in the unscalable category – client infographics. You can’t scale your time, but you can automate the process of interacting with clients and minimize the time it takes to produce the infographic using tools like Adioma in addition to Adobe Illustrator.

Let’s make a projection of how much money you can make on infographics alone, without offering custom services, but only through affiliate links, ads, product placements, and licenses.

Let us say you start with a 10-page infographic blog. Let us assume that you make $0 the first week. The second week you make only $100 (on one ad banner with only 6,000 impressions with a 2% CTR). Let’s assume that you make only one infographic post per day (and I assume you will create what I call a “low-effort infographic” – minimum illustration, only text and icons set into a template. More on low-effort infographics below).  From historic traffic data on my blog, I know that when I post daily I have a 9% weekly revenue growth rate on ads alone. The cumulative effect of having a lot of posts, increases the CTR for both new posts and old ones. Assuming you produce one low-effort infographic per day, here is what your revenue will look like. Starting with week 2, I multiplied your weekly revenue by 1.09 each week.

These same numbers looks like this in a graph.

At the end of your first year you could be making $7,435 a week. I isolated ad revenue here to simplify the calculation. Your ad revenue will be connected to your other activities like your social media reach, your domain rank, and your reputation as an valuable source of infographic information. This also assumes that you have daily consistency, which bloggers like Seth Godin showed is possible. I myself can also do it visually, that’s why infographics work for me as a medium. If you are a visual learner, there is a good chance they will work for you.

Now let’s get back to the beginning – the reason behind all this growth is that you will find a need nestled inside a content void undiscovered by other infographic authors.

Now, let’s see how exactly you can find a content void that will allow you to get an audience fast and make money on infographics.

Suppose you picked a topic and you produced infographics and articles that filled a need. Now you can show products and services alongside your infographics that you will make money from:

Infographics can cost you from almost nothing to tens of thousands of dollars. When you are doing your research, use the cost-effective options. Speed is key. You want to prove your concepts fast. You can plan, create, publish and gather data on an infographic in a single day.

Let me show you exactly how infographics that bring me traffic look like and how much traffic they bring. Remember the power law? Here I am showing you infographics that bring the most traffic. then I divided them by how much effort I put in to create them. At the beginning I thought that more effort=more traffic. That is not quite true. Design effort does not matter. What matters is insight and visual structure. Notice that the low effort infographics are still structured the same. But they are shorter and they have low-detail illustrations.

Five of the top performing infographics are timelines – easy to follow and structured. I wrote about the rules of creating a timeline infographic here.

Many of these infographics were created in Illustrator, except for the timelines, which we already used Adioma to create. You can see that if you are not yet proficient in Illustrator and Photoshop, you can still create infographics. On Adioma, for example, you can make an infographic in a few minutes. Mark and I used to only use Illustrator, but then we realized that a lot of design can be automated, we started being more productive. First, we created a large icon library that is searchable. For everything I write in an infographic I can now find an icon fast. In some cases our algorithm finds it instantly as I type. Second, we realized that some infographic templates are so versatile that we can save time by reusing them. To reuse them we have to make the regenerate themselves for as many points as we need. Third, color schemes can be automated. There are rules of color-matching and we can automate them to apply with one click. That’s what we did when we created Adioma for ourselves to speed up our design process.  Now that we use Adioma, we have made more infographics in the last 5 months than in the previous 2 years – more than 30x our productivity.

Not sure if you can raise your productivity? Get a free trial of Adioma for 2 weeks and see how many readers you get in 2 weeks.  We give you pre-made templates right away in your dashboard so you can get started fast.

Look, if you are still hesitating because research and writing don’t sound glamorous, consider how a startup you definitely have heard of started. A little experimentation goes a long way.|||

