The following feeds are available:

Each feed is valid RSS served over HTTPS.

The “firehose” feeds contain all new posts and comments as they appear on Hacker News:

For just the posts that have appeared on the front page:

If the firehose feeds are a bit too noisy for you, read below on filtering them with the and/or parameters.

You can get a feed of new posts and/or comments containing keywords by using the parameter. For example:

If you want a single search feed but multiple keywords, separate the keywords with “ OR “:

Ask HN, Show HN, and polls are available:

If you don’t want to miss a post or comment by a given user, you can subscribe to that user’s feed:

A feed of new comments on a particular post can be found at:

With the numerical ID found in the URL when viewing the comments page.

You can modify any feed’s output using URL parameters. Multiple parameters can be applied at the same time by joining them with an ampersand.

You can apply a or parameter to any feed to filter the results so only entries with more than N points or comments are shown:

You can also combine both parameters:

Unfortunately, does not work with a parameter.

By default, searches on posts only look at titles. If you want to search against the submitted URLs themselves, use the parameter.

Here are some examples:

By default, the RSS element points to the submitted article’s URL. The element can be changed to point to the Hacker News comment page by appending to the end of the URL. For example:

You can disable the element entirely by passing the parameter:

By default, feeds return 20 RSS items. This can be increased via the parameter:

There is a hardcoded limit of 100 entries, so keep that in mind.

hnrss.org is a labor of love, but if the project has made your job or hobby project easier and you want to show some gratitude, donations are very much appreciated. Thanks!

hnrss.org uses Algolia to query Hacker News and generate the feeds. The code is a Flask app. It runs on nginx with Varnish providing a cache layer and Let’s Encrypt providing HTTPS.

This documentation is built with Hugo, rendered using the Go font family, and hosted on Github Pages.

The source of the app and the documentation are hosted on Github.|||

