Title page to the first part. M. DC. LXXXXIII (1693). One volume in 8 parts. Each part has separate title-page, dated 1693-1696, by Nicholas De Fer. Title pages to each part printed in red and black. Includes engraved dedication to the Duc de Bourgogne “Introduction a la Fortification dediee a Monseigneur le Duc Bourgogne … 1693.”, and Armorial bookplate of "The Right Hon.ble Algernon Capell, Earl of Essex, Viscount Maldon, and Baron Capell of Hadham," dated 1701 on verso. Letter press table of contents for parts 1-5 and contemporary manuscript listing of parts 5-8 on verso. Allegorical frontispiece engraved by Schoonebeck following the part 2 title page. Atlas includes 184 uncolored engraved maps, plans and views, one folded, some with corresponding letterpress or engraved text. Showing fortifications of European cities in France, Germany and the Netherlands, also includes other regions, including Malta, Constantinople,Tripoli, Batavia and map of Quebec, which is bound in part 5 as map 23. The Battle of Quebec was fought in October 1690 between the colonies of New France and Massachusetts Bay. In 1690, Sir William Phips was appointed major-general by Massachusetts to command an expedition against French Acadia. He sailed with seven vessels carrying a 450-strong provincial "Foot Regiment", and Port Royal surrendered on 21 May. Atlas bound in contemporary calf, with raised decorated spine, with title “Forces del Evrope.” Nicolas De Fer, a French Publisher, engraver, geographer and cartographer. He made maps of places in Europe and North America, including New Spain,[7] places fortified by Vauban, the Low Countries, and the War of the Spanish Succession. In 1698, de Fer published a map of North America, which included a depiction of beavers building dams near Niagara Falls. One volume in 8 parts. Each part has separate title-page, dated 1693-1696, by Nicholas De Fer. Title pages to each part printed in red and black. Includes engraved dedication to the Duc de Bourgogne “Introduction a la Fortification dediee a Monseigneur le Duc Bourgogne … 1693.”, and Armorial bookplate of "The Right Hon.ble Algernon Capell, Earl of Essex, Viscount Maldon, and Baron Capell of Hadham," dated 1701 on verso. Letter press table of contents for parts 1-5 and contemporary manuscript listing of parts 5-8 on verso. Allegorical frontispiece engraved by Schoonebeck following the part 2 title page. Atlas includes 184 uncolored engraved maps, plans and views, one folded, some with corresponding letterpress or engraved text. Showing fortifications of European cities in France, Germany and the Netherlands, also includes other regions, including Malta, Constantinople,Tripoli, Batavia and map of Quebec, which is bound in part 5 as map 23. The Battle of Quebec was fought in October 1690 between the colonies of New France and Massachusetts Bay. In 1690, Sir William Phips was appointed major-general by Massachusetts to command an expedition against French Acadia. He sailed with seven vessels carrying a 450-strong provincial "Foot Regiment", and Port Royal surrendered on 21 May. Atlas bound in contemporary calf, with raised decorated spine, with title “Forces del Evrope.” Nicolas De Fer, a French Publisher, engraver, geographer and cartographer. He made maps of places in Europe and North America, including New Spain,[7] places fortified by Vauban, the Low Countries, and the War of the Spanish Succession. In 1698, de Fer published a map of North America, which included a depiction of beavers building dams near Niagara Falls. Engraved plan of the beseiged fortress with circumvallation & contrevallation lines. Shows rivers, canals, settlements and place names. Includes key to the important sites on the map and notes. Engraved plan of Antwerp with its fortifications. Shows rivers, canals, settlements and place names. Includes key to the important sites on the map and notes. Plan of Rome, reduced from the large Nolli "Topografia di Roma" on 12 sheets, with various views on border. published in 1748. He collaborated with Piranesi on this small reduction that appeared in the atlas of the 12 sheets, after the index. This is why it has the plate number 33 at top left and 34 at top right. The plan is by Giovanni Battista Nolli, the views around it by Piranesi. Map includes 170 entries in the index, and hundreds more locations marked on the actual plan. Includes dedicated text at the top left corner with a decorative cartouche. The city is represented only within the Aurelian walls except for areas outside the Porta Pia and the Porta del Popolo. Below the plan is a view of St. Peter's Square, the Trevi Fountain, Santa Maria Maggiore and Santa Croce in Gerusalemme. Shows names of buildings, plazas, churches, drainage, and other points of interest. Includes title cartouche. Pictorial map showing Poland as a red carnation, the tradition in Poland was to wear a red carnation to celebrate the International Workers Day on May 1st, which was one of the most important holidays of the Communist countries. Published by WAG. Editorial Ogolno Polityczne in Warsaw. Map shows administrative boundaries and major cities and towns. This is an early work of a Polish artist Roman Cieslewicz,1930 -1996 a graphic artist and photographer. Date estimated. Hemisphere Austral ou Antarctique projette sur un horizon dont le zenith est situe a 140 degres de longit Orient de l' Isle de Fer et a 66d 32' de latit australe, dressse sous les yeux de M. Le Duc De Croy par le Sr. de Vaugondy, Geographe ord. du Roi, du feu Roi de Pologne Duc de Lorr, et de Bar, de l'Academie Royale des Sciences et Belles-lettres de Nancy et Censeur royal; publie sous l'approbation de l'Academie royale des sciences de 24 Mars 1773 et agmente en 1776 ... Grave par E. Dussy. Hand color in outline circular map of the Southern Hemisphere according to the latest discoveries with the tracks of the Captain James Cook. Showing Cook's tracks of the recent expeditions of Cook and Bouganville on New Zealand, Australia, and the South Pacific. Also showing the routes of modern explorers, such as in 1642 Tasman, Halley in 1700, St. Louis in 1718, Bouvet in 1738, and Cook & Bougainville in 1768. Includes observation notes, table of latitude and longitude and notes. Digital composite of sheets 1-4. New road map of Paris and suburbs 98.5x142, on 4 sheets 54x78. Main buildings illustrated by M. Pichon, map engraved by Michel Glot. Published by Esnauts and Rapilly. Centered on the Seine, depicts Paris prior to the French Revolution. Covers Paris on both sides of the Seine. Framed by a floral border. Title cartouche showing angels and an allegory of Paris with the symbols of the arts and sciences. Around the map are 28 views of places and landmarks. The map shows streets, parishes, colleges, hospitals, important buildings, landmarks, major squares and other points of interest. Includes tables identifying points of interest. The present example is an early state of the plan. There is an earlier edition of 1783 and later editions of 1789, 1792, 1794, 1801 and 1802. The later editions apparently have significant revisions, especially those issued after 1793. Map of Omaha City, Nebraska. Published by Oscar F. Davis, surveyor & real estate agent, Omaha, Nebraska. 1866. Gast, Moeller & Co., lithographers, St. Louis, MO. Entered ... 1866, by Oscar Davis ... Nebraska. Lithographed map, with decorative border. Shows townships, sections, subdivisions, land owners, farm houses, rural buildings, roads, railroads and river. Includes a decorative compass rose oriented with the north to upper right margin. Among the earliest plans of Omaha. Much information with streets and many property owners named. The route of the Union Pacific RR is marked. A handsome lithograph with an acanthus leaf border, steam ferry in the Missouri River, decorative direction indicator. At top left is an idealized image of the neoclassical Territorial Capitol before its dome was completed. Oscar F. Davis was an early Omaha settler with a surveying and engineering business. He later became land commissioner for the Union Pacific. Engraved postal map of all of the Austrian dominions. This is the "mother" of all the postal maps of the Austrian monarchy, it extends north from Berlin and Warsaw to Rome in the south, from Paris in the west to Bucharest in the east. "The first map of the entire monarchy after more than half a century" (Austria Picta, p. 100). On sheet 105x155.5, dissected into 16 sections 26x39, backed with linen, created by Georg Ignaz Freiherr von Metzburg on the scale of 1: 1,300,000 in 1782. Engraved by Johann Ernst Mansfeld. Shown on this map are 16 post stations on the line between Salzburg and Vienna. Shows postal routes, administrative boundaries, cities, towns, villages, roads and landmarks. Relief shown pictorially. Includes a title cartouche with decorated coat of arms of Austria / Lorraine, an open two- horse carriage passes, and people are sitting in the car. The coachman wears a posthorn that dangles on a belt hanging from his back. The scenes depicted the theme of travel, and the map contributes to the understanding of the history of the postal service by showing the equipment and means of transport of travelers. Symbols show single, one and one half, and double post deliveries which we assume refers to frequency of delivery. Colored manuscript map of Asia Minor 41.5x50, dissected into 4 sections, backed with linen. Presumably drawn by Henry Kiepert. Sheet No. 36. Shows boundaries, cities, towns, rivers and mountains. Relief shown by shadings and spot heights (Covers to) Larrance's Post office chart, and maps of ten states, showing the locality of the counties and county seats in a moment, by figures: to which is appended an easy way to calculate interest at any per cent. By Isaac Larrance. Cincinnati : Printed and for sale by I. A. Pittman. 1866. (on verso title page) Entered according to Act of Congress in the year eighteen hundred and sixty six, by Isaac Larrance ... Ohio. 19th century pocket atlas for use by postmasters in 48 pages. With 20 woodcut maps, covering Western States, printed in red and blue, with corresponding listings of the counties and county seats. Includes additional maps of Pennsylvania pasted on page 48 and inside back cover. Each map presented in two versions, one naming each county and the other naming each county seat, tables correspond with a numbered grid on each map to aid in locating the county or seat. On page 5 is a short testimonial, dated Nov.10, 1858, from Abraham Lincoln "Having hastily examined Larrance's Post Office chart and considered the principal upon which it is arranged, I think it will prove a great convenience to Post Masters and others whose business leads them to search out particular localities upon maps." Under the Lincoln quote is this statement: "A diploma was awarded by the United States Fair, held at Cincinnati, 1860, to Isaac Larrance." Atlas is bound in cloth covered boards, blind stamped on back and front covers with "Larrance's Post office charts and maps of Western States." in gilt on front cover. (Title Page to) Larrance's Post office chart, and maps of ten states, showing the locality of the counties and county seats in a moment, by figures: to which is appended an easy way to calculate interest at any per cent. By Isaac Larrance. Cincinnati : Printed and for sale by I. A. Pittman. 1866. (on verso title page) Entered according to Act of Congress in the year eighteen hundred and sixty six, by Isaac Larrance ... Ohio. 19th century pocket atlas for use by postmasters in 48 pages. With 20 woodcut maps, covering Western States, printed in red and blue, with corresponding listings of the counties and county seats. Includes additional maps of Pennsylvania pasted on page 48 and inside back cover. Each map presented in two versions, one naming each county and the other naming each county seat, tables correspond with a numbered grid on each map to aid in locating the county or seat. On page 5 is a short testimonial, dated Nov.10, 1858, from Abraham Lincoln "Having hastily examined Larrance's Post Office chart and considered the principal upon which it is arranged, I think it will prove a great convenience to Post Masters and others whose business leads them to search out particular localities upon maps." Under the Lincoln quote is this statement: "A diploma was awarded by the United States Fair, held at Cincinnati, 1860, to Isaac Larrance." Atlas is bound in cloth covered boards, blind stamped on back and front covers with "Larrance's Post office charts and maps of Western States." in gilt on front cover. (Contents to) Larrance's Post office chart, and maps of ten states, showing the locality of the counties and county seats in a moment, by figures: to which is appended an easy way to calculate interest at any per cent. By Isaac Larrance. Cincinnati : Printed and for sale by I. A. Pittman. 1866. (on verso title page) Entered according to Act of Congress in the year eighteen hundred and sixty six, by Isaac Larrance ... Ohio. 19th century pocket atlas for use by postmasters in 48 pages. With 20 woodcut maps, covering Western States, printed in red and blue, with corresponding listings of the counties and county seats. Includes additional maps of Pennsylvania pasted on page 48 and inside back cover. Each map presented in two versions, one naming each county and the other naming each county seat, tables correspond with a numbered grid on each map to aid in locating the county or seat. On page 5 is a short testimonial, dated Nov.10, 1858, from Abraham Lincoln "Having hastily examined Larrance's Post Office chart and considered the principal upon which it is arranged, I think it will prove a great convenience to Post Masters and others whose business leads them to search out particular localities upon maps." Under the Lincoln quote is this statement: "A diploma was awarded by the United States Fair, held at Cincinnati, 1860, to Isaac Larrance." Atlas is bound in cloth covered boards, blind stamped on back and front covers with "Larrance's Post office charts and maps of Western States." in gilt on front cover. (Text Page to) Larrance's Post office chart, and maps of ten states, showing the locality of the counties and county seats in a moment, by figures: to which is appended an easy way to calculate interest at any per cent. By Isaac Larrance. Cincinnati : Printed and for sale by I. A. Pittman. 1866. (on verso title page) Entered according to Act of Congress in the year eighteen hundred and sixty six, by Isaac Larrance ... Ohio. 19th century pocket atlas for use by postmasters in 48 pages. With 20 woodcut maps, covering Western States, printed in red and blue, with corresponding listings of the counties and county seats. Includes additional maps of Pennsylvania pasted on page 48 and inside back cover. Each map presented in two versions, one naming each county and the other naming each county seat, tables correspond with a numbered grid on each map to aid in locating the county or seat. On page 5 is a short testimonial, dated Nov.10, 1858, from Abraham Lincoln "Having hastily examined Larrance's Post Office chart and considered the principal upon which it is arranged, I think it will prove a great convenience to Post Masters and others whose business leads them to search out particular localities upon maps." Under the Lincoln quote is this statement: "A diploma was awarded by the United States Fair, held at Cincinnati, 1860, to Isaac Larrance." Atlas is bound in cloth covered boards, blind stamped on back and front covers with "Larrance's Post office charts and maps of Western States." in gilt on front cover. (Index Page to) Ohio Counties. (to accompany) Larrance's Post office chart, and maps of ten states ... By Isaac Larrance. Cincinnati : Printed and for sale by I. A. Pittman. 1866. Index to Ohio Counties. "The figures opposite the names of each county refer to the figures on the sides of the map. " Counties in Ohio. (to accompany) Larrance's Post office chart, and maps of ten states ... By Isaac Larrance. Cincinnati : Printed and for sale by I. A. Pittman. 1866. Color map of the Ohio counties. Shows county boundaries, towns and railroads. (Title Page to) Nouvel Atlas, tres-exact et fort commode pour toutes sortes de personnes, Contenant les Principales Cartes Geographiques. Dresse suivant les nouvelles observations de Mrs. de l'Academie Royale des Sciences, & rectifie sur les Relations les plus recentes des plus fideles voyageurs. A Leide, Chez Pierre Van der Aa, Marchand Libraire. Avec Privilege. Van de Aa describes this book as a new atlas, which contains the principal geographical maps of modern long-journey voyages which have been made both by sea and by land in all parts of the world, and of the most famous routes for travelers from the year 1246 to 1696, drawn up according to the new observations of members of the Royal Academy of Sciences. Includes engraved hand colored pictorial title and dedication plates; 2 pages of introductory text “Avis au lecteur”, 4 pages of descriptive text; La Nouvelle Geographie Aisee, and manuscript index "Table des Nouvelles carte geographiques ...". Manuscript date "1686" on frontispiece. Pages numbered also in manuscript, 5-100, 98 maps numbered in manuscript, 6-100. Map number 46 is in 3 parts, 46A-46C. Maps are engraved and hand colored. There are many decorative title cartouches, including figures, cherubs, fauna and views. Showing political and administrative boundaries, major cities, towns, villages, rivers, lakes, landmarks, roads, forests and mountains. Relief shown pictorially. Some maps includes compass rose and notations. Bound in full leather covers, with Title "Atlas" embossed in gilt on spine. Pieter van der Aa, a Dutch publisher and printer was best known for his cartographic work. He opened a bookshop and publishing house in Leiden in 1677, and started his first business there in 1683. By 1694 he was made printer to Leiden University, and by 1715, he was appointed the official printer to the town of Leiden. His major work was the massive Galerie Agreable du Monde (1729) a compendium of some 3,000 plates in 66 volumes, published in an edition of 100 sets. Other publications included Atlas Nouveau et Curieux and Atlas Nouvel, both produced in 1714. Van der Aa also produced separately issued maps and reissued maps by other publishers, such as Les Forces de l’Europe (1726), originally published in 1696 by Nicolas de Fer. (Text Page to) Nouvel Atlas, tres-exact et fort commode pour toutes sortes de personnes, Contenant les Principales Cartes Geographiques. Dresse suivant les nouvelles observations de Mrs. de l'Academie Royale des Sciences, & rectifie sur les Relations les plus recentes des plus fideles voyageurs. A Leide, Chez Pierre Van der Aa, Marchand Libraire. Avec Privilege. Van de Aa describes this book as a new atlas, which contains the principal geographical maps of modern long-journey voyages which have been made both by sea and by land in all parts of the world, and of the most famous routes for travelers from the year 1246 to 1696, drawn up according to the new observations of members of the Royal Academy of Sciences. Includes engraved hand colored pictorial title and dedication plates; 2 pages of introductory text “Avis au lecteur”, 4 pages of descriptive text; La Nouvelle Geographie Aisee, and manuscript index "Table des Nouvelles carte geographiques ...". Manuscript date "1686" on frontispiece. Pages numbered also in manuscript, 5-100, 98 maps numbered in manuscript, 6-100. Map number 46 is in 3 parts, 46A-46C. Maps are engraved and hand colored. There are many decorative title cartouches, including figures, cherubs, fauna and views. Showing political and administrative boundaries, major cities, towns, villages, rivers, lakes, landmarks, roads, forests and mountains. Relief shown pictorially. Some maps includes compass rose and notations. Bound in full leather covers, with Title "Atlas" embossed in gilt on spine. Pieter van der Aa, a Dutch publisher and printer was best known for his cartographic work. He opened a bookshop and publishing house in Leiden in 1677, and started his first business there in 1683. By 1694 he was made printer to Leiden University, and by 1715, he was appointed the official printer to the town of Leiden. His major work was the massive Galerie Agreable du Monde (1729) a compendium of some 3,000 plates in 66 volumes, published in an edition of 100 sets. Other publications included Atlas Nouveau et Curieux and Atlas Nouvel, both produced in 1714. Van der Aa also produced separately issued maps and reissued maps by other publishers, such as Les Forces de l’Europe (1726), originally published in 1696 by Nicolas de Fer. Full color double hemispherical world map, with decorative cartouches and views. Showing routes of Tasman, Magellan, and Mendana. Relief shown pictorially. Includes notation. Full color map of North America and the West Indies. Centered on the Great lakes, covers from Baffin Bay to the Amerique Meridionale, including Florida, New Mexico, New Spain (Mexico), California, Nouvelle France, and the Hudson Bay. California is not clear whether it is an island or not. The Gulf of California is left open ended, Parts of California are identified as New Albion. The exploration routes used by d'Oliver, Cortez, and Drake are shown in dote lines to the west of Mexico. Map showing political and administrative boundaries and settlements. Relief shown pictorially. Includes decorative title cartouche. Full color map of Southern States. Covers part of Mexico, New Mexico, Texas, and Florida as far North as Illinois and Philadelphia, includes also the Carolinas, Virgina and Maryland. Map showing political and administrative boundaries, Native American settlements, major towns and villages. Relief shown pictorially. Includes decorative title cartouche. Full color map of Canada. Showing Great lakes and Hudson Bay, administrative boundaries, major towns and villages. The exploratory routes shown in dote lines. Relief shown pictorially. Includes decorative title cartouche and explanation notes. First typographic atlas of Austria and the nearest border countries, with 15 colored letterpress printing maps. Bound in marbled paper covered boards. Maps produced and edited by Franz Raffelrsperger. Geographically set by F. Rumpold. Vienna:. Bermann. Showing geographical features, political and administrative boundaries, cities and towns, rivers and mountains. Relief shown by hachures. Franz Raffelsberger, Geographer, cartographer and topographer, was born in Modor (Modern, Hungary). He is now considered one of the pioneers of the typographic maps method Karte des Kaiserthums Oesterreich. Ddurchgeschen und verbessert, herausgegeben vom geographen Franz Raffelsperger. Typographisch ausgeführt in der ersten k. k. a p. Kunstdruckerei ; im typographischen Landkarten-Verlage und bei J. Bermann und Sohn am Graben. Wien 1841. geographischer Satz von F. Rumpold. (to accompany) Erster typometrischer Atlas, oder Austria ... von Franz Raffelsperger. Wien 1843. Outline colored letterpress printing map of Austria and border countries. Shows political boundaries, cities and towns and place names. Includes table of "Politische Eintheilung". Karte des Erzherzogthumes Oesterreich mit Salzburg. Herausgegeben vom geographen Franz Raffelsperger. Typographisch ausgeführt in der ersten k. k. a p. Kunstdruckerei ; im typographischen Landkarten-Verlage und bei J. Bermann und Sohn am Graben. Wien 1841. Geographischer Satz von F. Rumpold. (to accompany) Erster typometrischer Atlas, oder Austria ... von Franz Raffelsperger. Wien 1843. Outline colored letterpress printing map of Austria. Shows boundaries, cities, towns and place names. Includes explanation and table of "Landes - Eintheilung". Karte des Konigreiche Ungarn, Croatien, Slavonien Und Den Militairgrenzen. Herausgegeben vom geographen Franz Raffelsperger. Typographisch ausgeführt in der ersten k. k. a p. Kunstdruckerei ; im typographischen Landkarten-Verlage und bei J. Bermann und Sohn am Graben. Wien. (to accompany) Erster typometrischer Atlas, oder Austria ... von Franz Raffelsperger. Wien 1843. Composite of the sheets 3-6, outline colored letterpress printing map of Central Europe. Shows boundaries, cities, towns and place names. Includes explanation and table of "Landes - Eintheilung". Leeds from A.D. 1626 - the year of the Royal Charter granted by King Charles the First. From Roderick Barron: "Extremely uncommon historical and pictorial map of the Yorkshire City of Leeds, the design of Yorkshire architect & cartographer, Dennis Mason Jones [1908-2010]. It was published at fellow pictorial mapmaker Kerry Lee’s Blandford Studio workshop in London in about 1948-9, where Jones resided briefly after the war. It formed one of the series of decorative maps published by Lee’s company, Pictorial Maps Ltd in the late 1940’s which included Oxford, Cambridge & Stratford-upon-Avon. Following a career in the family architectural practice in Leeds, in retirement Jones would return to his mapmaking interests, designing and publishing a series of Heritage Maps - pictorial maps of historic British cities. He also received map commissions from such luminaries as the Duke of Edinburgh and Walt Disney (a map of British Castles for the Epcot Centre). He died in 2010, aged 91. Mason’s Leeds map would seem to be considerably rarer than Kerry Lee’s other Pictorial Maps Ltd publications of the immediate post-war period." (Taisho Japanese map of the world. Taisho Japanese map of Japan and Korea). (9 insets). Wall map of the world commemorating Japanese involvement in World War I on sheet 190x87. Mounted on bamboo rods framed with decorative cloth. In 2 parts: The upper part showing double hemisphere projection map of the world, omitting the Antarctic and any small islands, with numerous portraits of world leaders, most of whom were in power during the first world war. At center is an image of the Japanese Emperor Taisho. The top left corner is an image of someone made to look like Emperor Jimmu, the 1st emperor of Japan. The top right corner is an image of Emperor Meji (1868 – 1912), who preceded Taisho and is known for moving the capitol to Edo (present day Tokyo). Other world leaders shown above the map include King George V (Great Britain) Tsar Nicolas II (Russia), Sultan Mehmed V (Ottoman), Franz Joseph (Austria – Hungary), Woodrow Wilson (United States of America), and Albert I (Belgium), to name a few. The lower part Includes map of Japan and Korea with 9 insets: including map of the world during WWI, map of Taiwan, map of the north extension of Kurile Islands, etc. Includes legend. Date estimated 1918. Visscher's Atlas minor, printed by Petrus Schenk and Reinier & Iosua Ottens. Atlas consists of hand colored title page, engraved by Ger. de Lairesse, and manuscript index page, listing 23 maps, double page engraved hand colored in outline, by Visscher, Schenk, Mortier, Ottens, F. Zuerner, H. Jaillot, Delisle, G. and L. Valk, and De Witt. Including: a double-hemispheric world, northern hemisphere, southern hemisphere, maps of the continents (Europe, Asia, Africa, and America), followed by maps of European regions (including Russia), and a map of the Holy Land. Atlas lacks sheet no. 17 (Hungaria ... ). Maps are in Latin, French and Dutch. Maps are undated, except the the map of L' Hemisphere Septentrional, dated 1740, map of Poland, dated 1734, and map of Terra sancta, dated 1659. Bound in half vellum over marbled paper covered boards. Not in Koeman Planisphaerium terrestre cum utroque coelesti hemisphaerio, sive diversa orbis terraquei ... Opera et studio A.F. Zurneri = Vlakke Aard-kloot met het beide hemelsch half-rond, of de onderscheidene verbeelding van de land-water-waereld ... Door vlyt en naarstigheid van A.F. Zurner. (to accompany) Atlas minor sive Totius orbis terrarum contracta delinea ex conatibus Nic. Visscher. Engraved hand colored in outline map of the Eastern and Western hemispheres. Surrounded by two northern and southern celestial hemispheres, 26 astronomical and geographical diagrams. Shows the coast of Australia, the western coast of New Zealand, California shown as an island with an indistinct Fretum Anian and Terra Esonis above it. Includes explanatory text and explorer's tracks, including Magellan, Dampier, Tasman, Gaetani and Charmont. Relief shown pictorially. Includes panorama views at the bottom depicting earthquakes, tides, vortices, and volcanoes. Date estimated. Europae in Tabula Geographica Delineatio : admentem novissimorum eorumque optimorum geographorum emendata, indicibus utilissimis aucta et adusum Tyronum imprimis geographicorum variis compendiosae methodi adminiculis accomodata. Opera A.F. Zurneri ... Ex officina Petri Schenkii. In Platea vulgo de Warmoes straat sub signo N. Visscher athlas. (to accompany) Atlas minor sive Totius orbis terrarum contracta delinea ex conatibus Nic. Visscher. Engraved hand colored in outline map of Europe with decorative cartouche, inset map, explanatory table and index. Published by A. F. Zuerner, printed by P. Schenk. Shows political boundaries, cities, rivers and mountains. Relief shown pictorially. L' Asiae in Tabula Geographica Delineatio : admentem novissimorum eorumque optimorum geographorum emendata, indicibus utilissimis aucta et adusum Tyronum imprimis geographicorum variis compendiosae methodi adminiculis accomodata. Opera A.F. Zurneri ... Ex officina Petri Schenkii. In Platea vulgo de Warmoes straat sub signo N. Visscher athlas. (to accompany) Atlas minor sive Totius orbis terrarum contracta delinea ex conatibus Nic. Visscher. Engraved hand colored in outline map of Asia with decorative cartouche, table and index. Prepared by A. F. Zuerner, printed by P. Schenk. Shows political boundaries, cities, towns, rivers and mountains. Relief shown pictorially. Africae in Tabula Geographica Delineatio : admentem novissimorum eorumque optimorum geographorum emendata, indicibus utilissimis aucta et adusum Tyronum imprimis geographicorum variis compendiosae methodi adminiculis accomodata. Opera A.F. Zurneri ... Ex officina Petri Schenkii. In Platea vulgo de Warmoes straat sub signo N. Visscher athlas. (to accompany) Atlas minor sive Totius orbis terrarum contracta delinea ex conatibus Nic. Visscher. Engraved hand colored in outline map of Africa with decorative cartouche, table and text. Published by A. F. Zuerner, printed by P. Schenk. Shows political boundaries, cities, towns, rivers and mountains. Relief shown pictorially. Americae tam Septentrionalis Quam Meridionalis in Mappa Geographica Deliniatio : admentem novissimorum eorumque optimorum geographorum emendata, indicibus utilissimis aucta et adusum Tyronum imprimis geographicorum variis compendiosae methodi adminiculis accomodata. Opera A.F. Zurneri ... Ex officina Petri Schenkii. In Platea vulgo de Warmoes straat sub signo N. Visscher athlas. (to accompany) Atlas minor sive Totius orbis terrarum contracta delinea ex conatibus Nic. Visscher. Engraved hand colored in outline map of America with decorative cartouches, table and text describing discovery of America. Published by A. F. Zuerner, printed by P. Schenk. Shows political boundaries, cities, towns, rivers and mountains. Depicting California as an island. Relief shown pictorially. The New and Correct Chart of the Western and Southern Oceans. Foldout. This is a corrected edition of Edmund Halley's landmark 1701 chart with the same title. Peter Barbour hailed that chart as the "most significant cartographic achievement of Williamite England" (The Age of William III & Mary II, plate 106.) It was one of the earliest thematic maps, and the first to show lines of equal magnetic variation which was an important advance for navigation. A version of Halley's chart was added to the Fourth Book in 1721, but was discontinued in favor of this revised version in 1749. As noted in the flanking text, there is a "perpetual though slow Change in the Variation almost everywhere, which as made it necessary to construct [the chart] anew from accurate Observations, made by the most ingenious Navigators." (Title Page) The English Pilot. Describing the West-India Navigation, from Hudson's Bay to the River Amazones. Particularly delineating the coasts, capes, headlands, rivers, bays, roads, havens, harbours, streights, rocks, sands, shoals, banks, depths of water, and anchorage, with all the islands therein ... also a new description of Newfoundland, New England, New York, east and west New Jersey, Dellawar Bay, Virginia, Maryland, Carolina, &c. shewing the courses and distances from one place to another; the ebbing and flowing of the sea, the setting of the tides and currents, &c. with many other things necessary to be known in navigation. The whole being much enlarged and corrected, with the additions of several new charts and descriptions. London: Mount and Davidson, M,DCC,XCIV. A New Generall Chart for the West Indies of E. Wright's Projection. (Text Page) The English Pilot, The Fourth Book. A Description of Hudson's Streights (continued). Map of the Coast of New...   A Map of the Coast of New England, from Staten Island to the Island of Breton; as it was actually Survey'd by Capt. Cyprian Southack. (inset) Boston. Foldout. This is a reduction of the 8 sheet chart that made up The New England Coasting Pilot (London, 1729-34), by Southack, one of New England's most knowledgeable and experienced pilots. (Frontispiece) The full moon : Photographed at Jamaica by the expedition sent out by Harvard College Observatory. The moon : a summary of the existing knowledge of our satellite, with a complete photographic atlas. By Willaim H. Pickering. of Harvard College Observatory. One hundred illustrations. New York: Doubleday, Page & Company, 1903. (on verso of title page) Copyright 1902, by The Century Co. Copyright, 1903 by Doubleday, Page & Company. (Title Page to) The moon : a summary of the existing knowledge of our satellite, with a complete photographic atlas. By Willaim H. Pickering. of Harvard College Observatory. One hundred illustrations. New York: Doubleday, Page & Company, 1903. (on verso of title page) Copyright 1902, by The Century Co. Copyright, 1903 by Doubleday, Page & Company. This photographic atlas of the moon is a guide to observing the features of the Moon. It was produced by William Henry Pickering (February 15, 1858 – January 16, 1938) an American astronomer. Selected lunar features are shown at high magnification to highlight and clearly illustrate certain regions. It contains 103 pages, including 92 uncolored plates, illustrations and 8 maps. Includes "Index to names," "Lunar contents," and "List of illustrations, Plates" numbered in full title to match map numbers. Bound in navy blue cloth covers with view of the moon pasted under title, reading "The Moon. W.H. Pickering" in white. Plate J: Mayer's map of the moon. Tob. Mayer, del. Phot u. Duck v. W. Hoffmann. Dresden. (to accompany) The moon : a summary of the existing knowledge of our satellite, with a complete photographic atlas. By Willaim H. Pickering. Notes: The first accurate map, 1775. A comparison of the plate with the Frontispiece and plate I illustrate the progress of selenography and methods of illustration at intervals of about 125 years. Plate I: Riccioli's map of the moon. (to accompany) The moon : a summary of the existing knowledge of our satellite, with a complete photographic atlas. By Willaim H. Pickering.|||

