This Edureka "Hadoop tutorial For Beginners" ( Hadoop Blog series: https://goo.gl/LFesy8 ) will help you to understand the problem with traditional system while processing Big Data and how Hadoop solves it. This tutorial will provide you a comprehensive idea about HDFS and YARN along with their architecture that has been explained in a very simple manner using examples and practical demonstration. At the end, you will get to know how to analyze Olympic data set using Hadoop and gain useful insights. 



Below are the topics covered in this tutorial:



1. Big Data Growth Drivers

2. What is Big Data?

3. Hadoop Introduction

4. Hadoop Master/Slave Architecture

5. Hadoop Core Components

6. HDFS Data Blocks

7. HDFS Read/Write Mechanism

8. What is MapReduce

9. MapReduce Program

10. MapReduce Job Workflow

11. Hadoop Ecosystem

12. Hadoop Use Case: Analyzing Olympic Dataset



Subscribe to our channel to get video updates. Hit the subscribe button above.



Check our complete Hadoop playlist here: https://goo.gl/ExJdZs



#Hadoop #Hadooptutorial #HadoopTutorialForBeginners #HadoopArchitecture #LearnHadoop #HadoopTraining #HadoopCertification



How it Works?



1. This is a 5 Week Instructor led Online Course, 40 hours of assignment and 30 hours of project work

2. We have a 24x7 One-on-One LIVE Technical Support to help you with any problems you might face or any clarifications you may require during the course.

3. At the end of the training you will have to undergo a 2-hour LIVE Practical Exam based on which we will provide you a Grade and a Verifiable Certificate!



- - - - - - - - - - - - - -



About the Course



Edureka’s Big Data and Hadoop online training is designed to help you become a top Hadoop developer. During this course, our expert Hadoop instructors will help you:



1. Master the concepts of HDFS and MapReduce framework

2. Understand Hadoop 2.x Architecture

3. Setup Hadoop Cluster and write Complex MapReduce programs

4. Learn data loading techniques using Sqoop and Flume

5. Perform data analytics using Pig, Hive and YARN

6. Implement HBase and MapReduce integration

7. Implement Advanced Usage and Indexing

8. Schedule jobs using Oozie

9. Implement best practices for Hadoop development

10. Work on a real life Project on Big Data Analytics

11. Understand Spark and its Ecosystem

12. Learn how to work in RDD in Spark



- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 



Who should go for this course?



If you belong to any of the following groups, knowledge of Big Data and Hadoop is crucial for you if you want to progress in your career:

1. Analytics professionals

2. BI /ETL/DW professionals

3. Project managers

4. Testing professionals

5. Mainframe professionals

6. Software developers and architects

7. Recent graduates passionate about building successful career in Big Data



- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 



Why Learn Hadoop?



Big Data! A Worldwide Problem?



According to Wikipedia, "Big data is collection of data sets so large and complex that it becomes difficult to process using on-hand database management tools or traditional data processing applications." In simpler terms, Big Data is a term given to large volumes of data that organizations store and process. However, it is becoming very difficult for companies to store, retrieve and process the ever-increasing data. If any company gets hold on managing its data well, nothing can stop it from becoming the next BIG success!



The problem lies in the use of traditional systems to store enormous data. Though these systems were a success a few years ago, with increasing amount and complexity of data, these are soon becoming obsolete. The good news is - Hadoop has become an integral part for storing, handling, evaluating and retrieving hundreds of terabytes, and even petabytes of data.



- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 



Opportunities for Hadoopers!



Opportunities for Hadoopers are infinite - from a Hadoop Developer, to a Hadoop Tester or a Hadoop Architect, and so on. If cracking and managing BIG Data is your passion in life, then think no more and Join Edureka's Hadoop Online course and carve a niche for yourself! 



Please write back to us at sales@edureka.co or call us at +91 88808 62004 for more information. 



Website: http://www.edureka.co/big-data-and-ha...

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/edurekaIN/

Twitter: https://twitter.com/edurekain

LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/company/edureka



Customer Review:



Michael Harkins, System Architect, Hortonworks says: “The courses are top rate. The best part is live instruction, with playback. But my favorite feature is viewing a previous class. Also, they are always there to answer questions, and prompt when you open an issue if you are having any trouble. Added bonus ~ you get lifetime access to the course you took!!! ~ This is the killer education app... I've take two courses, and I'm taking two more.”|||

This Edureka "Hadoop tutorial For Beginners" ( Hadoop Blog series: https://goo.gl/LFesy8 ) will help you to understand the problem with traditional system wh...