The visionary CEO made us question the project's timeline and his own mental state after naming the first of the project's tunneling machines after an existential quandary. In that cryptic tweet, Musk wrote he's "still waiting," leading us to think the Boring Company might never dig the amazing tunnels to fulfill his plans for the transportation system of the future.

Thankfully, it appears that Musk is doing just fine — and the Boring Company is in even better shape than we thought. Musk took to Instagram, as he often does, to share the first steps of progress with his followers, including the plans for the first full-length tunnel running from LAX to Culver City, Santa Monica, Westwood, and Sherman Oaks in Southern California.

Since he was dropping video on us, Musk posted on Instagram before tweeting out the links. The vids showed off some of the heavy duty equipment in action, including the electric sled that promises to shoot cars through the system at up to 125 mph.

These clips don't guarantee the tunnels will turn out exactly how Musk has described — the Boring Company still has a long way to go. For now, this is just an exciting look at the start of a bold new plan for the (uncertain) future of transportation.

Fear not, commuters of Los Angeles concerned about the region's tenuous position around fault lines. Musk claims the tunnels can stand up to shaky conditions.

He even showed us Gary, the mascot the Boring Company is using as a benchmark for its tunneling speed. Musk first mentioned the snail in his TED 2017 address before revealing the video of the tunnel concept.

The Boring Company's website also lists a group of open positions at the company — so if you're a California Professional Geologist and Certified Engineering Geologist or a Concrete Batch Plant Operator, Elon wants your help. He didn't share any info on when we might expect the tunnel to be complete — but we do know the plan is to expand the network to the greater Los Angeles area.|||

Elon Musk took to social media to share videos of the first progress of his Boring Company's tunneling project, which will run from LAX to Culver City.