The NPS recoding trick: the smart way to compute the Net Promoter Score

The Net Promoter Score is most people’s go-to measure for evaluating companies, brands, and business units. However, the the standard way of computing the NPS – subtract the promoters from the detractors – is a bit of a pain. And, in most apps, you cannot use it in stat tests, so you are never really sure when the NPS moves whether it reflects a change in performance, or just some random noise in the data.

The table to the right shows data for Apple.  Fourteen (14.4%) said they were Not at all likely to recommend Apple, 2.6% gave a rating of 1 out of 10, 2.0% gave a rating of 2, etc. If we add up the first seven categories (0 through 6), 51% of people in this data set are Detractors. Adding up categories 7 and 8 gives us 31% Neutrals, and then the remaining 18% are Promoters. So, in this data set, Apple’s NPS is -33.3, which is not great. (Among Apple customers, the NPS is much higher.)

The table below shows the raw data for the 153 people in the data set. The actual ratings, out of 11, are shown in the Recommend: Apple column. The second column shows the recoded data, where the original values are replaced by new values. The trick is to replace values of 0 through 6 with -100, values of 7 or 8 become 0, and values of 9 or 10 get a new value of 100. The column on the right shows the recoded data.

Why is this recoding clever? Once you have recoded the data this way, you can compute the NPS by computing the average, and you get exactly the same answer as you do when using the standard way.



The genius of the smarter way is that we can now compute NPS using any analysis app that is able to compute an average. For example, I have used the multiway table feature in Displayr to compute the NPS for Apple by age and gender, by just selecting the three variable (age, gender, and the recoded NPS variable).

The multiway table is created using Insert > More > Tables > Multiway Table.

The fastest way to do do this is to start using Displayr, and then:

Alternatively, if you want to do the calculations “by hand”:|||

The Net Promoter Score is most people's go-to measure for evaluating companies, brands, and business units. However, the the standard way of computing the NPS - subtract the promoters from the detrac