Home automation is a subject that becomes more and more approachable and of interest to everyone. Whether you are a multi-million dollar homeowner, an owner of a vintage house, or a person fascinated by technology, you should know that there are plenty of solutions to offer you a lively house, while maintaining the appearance that you love and appreciate.

In the last five years, Geeks of Technology has tested out thousands of home automation technologies, starting with climate control gadgets, security and surveillance cameras and monitoring systems, and even more advanced, digitally controlled sound systems and access control devices.

Today, we are going to talk about the most appreciated gadgets and technologies that people want in their homes in 2017. We really like the fact that home security is a hot subject this year, and in this list, you will see that lots of smart locks and surveillance systems are available.

Alongside surveillance, the second place was taken by climate control gadgets and digital personal assistants like Alexa and Google Home. Without any further ado, here are the Top 10 Hottest Home Automation Technologies for 2017.

Google managed to bring a great innovation in terms of home climate control with the first generation of Nest products. For those of you who don’t know, Nest is a remotely controlled heating system that has a built-in Wi-Fi system that can be set-up and customized using your PC, tablet, or mobile device.

As a result, you will be able to tell Nest to heat your home and keep it warm for a determined time, or tell it to cool down your house to a desired temperature. In 2017, Nest reached its peak with the third generation, which brings a great addition of thermal sensors, furnace monitoring, and geo-fencing support.

According to Google, their Nest product already helped people save billions of kilowatts/hour of energy power worldwide.

Geeks of Technology loves to install Nest in luxury home automation systems in South Florida because it’s easy to use, it has a beautiful, sharp design, and it’s quite affordable when you think about how much energy it can help you save. After all, their slogan is – “Programs itself, then pays for itself!”

If you are interested in the ultimate home automation set-up, then you need to have a controller like Crestron TST-902. It’s like having your personal assistant following you every step of the way.

Crestron TST-902 is a thin and stylish, cutting-edge touch screen controller designed to offer you a wide range controller for your entire home. It comes with voice recognition, video streaming support, and even web browsing.

We enjoy the clean, minimalist user interface, which makes it easy to control even by a child. Besides that, Crestron is known worldwide as the leader in home automation technologies, offering a large variety of gadgets and tools to make your home work alongside you.

This is a motorized shading system designed to fit to your room’s look, giving you privacy while maintaining the ambiance you want. Lutron is quite popular in the motorized shading area, offering the best shading solutions available for over 20 years.

They are great in terms of customer support, always providing top solutions, and customized designs.

The Serena system comes with mobile and remote controllers, and they are available in a roller and honeycomb style, which makes them flow even more with the existing style and decor of your home.

In short, Lutron Serena remote controlled shades are a great way to control the daylight in your home while maintaining a high level of elegance and comfort.

With Echo, Amazon managed to bring artificial intelligence to a whole new level. If you think that talking to an item in your house is crazy, one trial one with Echo and you will love it!

What is Echo? Amazon Echo is basically a wireless speaker that comes with a built-in personal assistant named Alexa. Alexa can help you create a schedule, play music, search for certain queries, read news for you, tell you the forecast and even answer crazy questions.

It has a top ring that you can adjust for volume and a simple microphone switch command. It’s extremely easy to set up and it takes only few seconds to do it.

A smart, app-based lighting solution from Philips. You simply screw in the bulb, connect the bridge to your router, then choose the colors of the lighting in your entire house from their application, which works for iOS, Android, and Windows Mobile.

You can choose when you want to turn on the lights and even setup a customized schedule for leaving and arriving back home.

Another great thing that Geeks of Technology loves about Philips Hue is that you can choose how warm the light is, so that you can build perfect moments when you need to.|||

Learn about the hottest home automation trends in 2017. From personal assistants to climate control, smart home automation technologies, and security systems.