Unfortunately, OS/2 had a crucial flaw in its design: a Synchronous Input Queue (SIQ). What this meant was that all messages to the GUI window server went through a single tollbooth. If any OS/2 native GUI app ever stopped servicing its window messages, the entire GUI would get stuck and the system froze. OK, technically the operating system was still running. Background tasks continued to execute just fine. You just couldn’t see them or interact with them or do anything, because the entire GUI was hung. Some enterprising OS/2 fan wrote an application that polled the joystick port and was supposed to unstick things when the user pressed a button. It rarely worked.

Ironically, if you never ran native OS/2 applications and just ran DOS and Windows apps in a VM, the operating system was much more stable.

OS/2’s fortune wasn’t helped by reports that users of IBM’s own Aptiva series had trouble installing it on their computers. IBM’s PC division also needed licenses from Microsoft to bundle Windows 95 with its systems, and Microsoft got quite petulant with its former partner, even demanding at one point that IBM stop all development on OS/2. IBM’s PC division ended up signing a license the same day that Windows 95 was released.

Microsoft really didn’t need to stoop to these levels. Windows 95 was a smash success, breaking all previous records for sales of operating systems. It changed the entire landscape of computing. Commodore and Atari were now out of the picture, and Apple was sent reeling by Windows 95’s success. IBM was in for the fight of its life, and its main weapon wasn’t up to snuff.

IBM wouldn’t give up the fight just yet, however. Big Blue had plans for taking back its rightful place at the head of the computing industry, and it was going to ally with everyone who wasn’t Microsoft if it could help it.

First up on its list of companies to crush: Intel. IBM, along with Sun, had been an early pioneer of a new type of microprocessor design called Reduced Instruction Set Computing (RISC). Basically, the idea was to cut out long and complicated instructions in favor of simpler tasks that could be done more quickly. IBM created a CPU called POWER (Performance Optimization With Enhanced RISC) and used it in its line of very expensive workstations.

IBM had already started a collaboration with Apple and Motorola to bring its groundbreaking POWER RISC processor technology to the desktop, and it used this influence to join Apple’s new operating system development project, which was then codenamed “Pink." The new OS venture was renamed Taligent, and the prospective kernel changed from an Apple-designed microkernel called Opus to a microkernel that IBM was developing for an even grander operating system that it named Workplace OS.

Workplace OS was to be the Ultimate Operating System, the OS to end all OSes. It would run on the Mach 3.0 microkernel developed at Carnegie Mellon University, and on top of that, the OS would run various “personalities,” including DOS, Windows, Macintosh, OS/400, AIX, and of course OS/2. It would run on every processor architecture under the sun, but it would mostly showcase the power of POWER. It would be all-singing and all-dancing.

And IBM never quite got around to finishing it.

Meanwhile, Dave Cutler’s team at Microsoft already shipped the first version of Windows NT (version 3.1) in July of 1993. It had higher resource requirements than OS/2, but it also did a lot more: it supported multiple CPUs, and it was multiplatform, ridiculously stable and fault-tolerant, fully 32-bit with an advanced 64-bit file system, and compatible with Windows applications. (It even had networking built in.) Windows NT 3.5 was released a year later, and a major new release with the Windows 95 user interface was planned for 1996. While Windows NT struggled to find a market in the early days of its life, it did everything it was advertised to do and ended up merging with the consumer Windows 9x series by 2001 with the release of Windows XP.

In the meantime, the PowerPC chip, which was based on IBM’s POWER designs (but was much cheaper), was released in partnership with Motorola and ended up saving Apple’s Macintosh division. However, plans to release consumer PowerPC machines to run other operating systems were perpetually delayed. One of the main problems was a lack of alternate operating systems. Taligent ran into development hell, was repositioned as a development environment, and was then canned completely. IBM hastily wrote an experimental port of OS/2 Warp for PowerPC, but abandoned it before it was finished. Workplace OS never got out of early alpha stages. Ironically, Windows NT was the only non-Macintosh consumer operating system to ship with PowerPC support. But the advantages of running a PowerPC system with Windows NT over an Intel system running Windows NT were few. The PowerPC chip was slightly faster, but it required native applications to be recompiled for its instruction set. Windows application vendors saw no reason to recompile their apps for a new platform, and most of them didn’t.

So to sum up: the new PowerPC was meant to take out Intel, but it didn’t do anything beyond saving the Macintosh. The new Workplace OS was meant to take out Windows NT, but IBM couldn’t finish it. And OS/2 was meant to take out Windows 95, but the exact opposite happened.

In 1996, IBM released OS/2 Warp 4, which included a revamped Workplace Shell, bundled Java and development tools, and a long-awaited fix for the Synchronous Input Queue. It wasn’t nearly enough. Sales of OS/2 dwindled while sales of Windows 95 continued to rise. IBM commissioned an internal study to reevaluate the commercial potential of OS/2 versus Windows, and the results weren’t pretty. The order came down from the top of the company: the OS/2 development lab in Boca Raton would be eliminated, Workplace OS would be killed, and over 1,300 people would lose their jobs. The Bear, beaten and bloodied, had left the field.

IBM would no longer develop new versions of OS/2, although it continued selling it until 2001. Who was buying it? Mostly banks, who were still wedded to IBM’s mainframes. The banks mostly used it in their automated teller machines, but Windows NT eventually took over this tiny market as well. After 2001, IBM stopped selling OS/2 directly and instead utilized Serenity Systems, one of its authorized business dealers, who rechristened the operating system as eComStation. You can still purchase eComStation today (some people do), but copies are very, very rare. Serenity Systems continues to release updates that add driver support for modern hardware, but the company is not actively developing the operating system itself. There simply isn’t enough demand to make such an enterprise profitable.

In December 2004, IBM announced that it was selling its entire PC division to the Chinese company Lenovo, marking the definitive end of a 23-year reign of selling personal computers. For nearly 10 of those 23 years, IBM tried in vain to replace the PC’s Microsoft-owned operating system with one of its own. Ultimately, it failed.

Many OS/2 fans petitioned IBM for years to free up the operating system’s code base to an open source license, but IBM has steadily refused. The company is probably unable to, as OS/2 still contains large chunks of proprietary code belonging to other companies—most significantly, Microsoft.

Most people who want to use OS/2 today are coming from a historical interest only, and their task is made more difficult by the fact that OS/2 has difficulty running under virtual machines such as VMWare. A Russian company was hired by a major bank in Moscow in the late 1990s to find a solution for their legacy OS/2 applications. It ended up writing its own virtual machine solution that became Parallels, a popular application that today allows Macintosh users to run Windows apps on OSX. In an eerie way, running Parallels today reminds me a lot of running Win-OS2 on OS/2 in the mid-1990s. Apple, perhaps wisely, has never bundled Parallels with its Mac computers.

So why did IBM fail so badly with OS/2? Why was Microsoft able to deftly cut IBM out of the picture and then beat it to death with Windows? And more importantly, are there any lessons from this story that might apply to hardware and software companies today?

IBM ignored the personal computer industry long enough that it was forced to rush out a PC design that was easy (and legal) to clone. Having done so, the company immediately wanted to put the genie back in the bottle and take the industry back from the copycats. When IBM announced the PS/2 and OS/2, many industry pundits seriously thought the company could do it.

Unfortunately, IBM was being pulled in two directions. The company's legacy mainframe division didn’t want any PCs that were too powerful, lest they take away the market for big iron. The PC division just wanted to sell lots of personal computers and didn’t care what it had to do in order to meet that goal. This fighting went back and forth, resulting in agonizing situations such as IBM’s own low-end Aptivas being unable to run OS/2 properly and the PC division promoting Windows instead.

IBM always thought that PCs would be best utilized as terminals that served the big mainframes it knew and loved. OS/2’s networking tools, available only in the Extended Edition, were mostly based on the assumption that PCs would connect to big iron servers that did the heavy lifting. This was a “top-down” approach to connecting computers together. In contrast, Microsoft approached networking from a “bottom-up” approach where the server was just another PC running Windows. As personal computing power grew and more robust versions of Windows like NT became available, this bottom-up approach became more and more viable. It's certainly much less expensive.

IBM also made a crucial error in promoting OS/2 as a “better DOS than DOS and a better Windows than Windows.” Having such amazing compatibility with other popular operating systems out of the box meant that the market for native OS/2 apps never had a chance to develop. Many people bought OS/2. Very few people bought OS/2 applications.

The book The Innovator’s Dilemma makes a very good case that big companies with dominant positions in legacy markets are institutionally incapable of shifting over to a new disruptive technology, even though those companies frequently invent said technologies themselves. IBM invented more computer technologies and holds more patents than any other computer company in history. Still, when push came to shove, it gave up the personal computer in favor of hanging on to the mainframe. IBM still sells mainframes today and makes good money doing so, but the company is no longer a force in personal computers.

Today, many people have observed that Microsoft is the new dominant force in legacy computing, with legacy redefined as a personal computer running Windows. The new disruptive force is smartphones and tablets, an area in which Apple and Google have become the new dominant forces. Microsoft, to its credit, responded as quickly as it was able to meet this new disruption. The company even re-designed its legacy user interface (the Windows desktop) to be more suited to tablets.

It could be argued that Microsoft was slow to act, just as IBM was. It could also be argued that Windows Phone and Surface tablets have failed to capture market share against iOS and Android in the same way that OS/2 failed to beat back Windows. However, there is one difference that separates Microsoft from most legacy companies: the company doesn’t give up. IBM threw in the towel on OS/2 and then on PCs in general. Microsoft is willing to spend as many billions as it takes in order to claw its way back to a position of power in the new mobile landscape. Microsoft still might not succeed, but for now at least, it's going to keep trying.

The second lesson of OS/2—to not be too compatible out of the box with rival operating systems—is a lesson that today’s phone and tablet makers should take seriously. Blackberry once touted that you could easily run Android apps on its BB10 operating system, but that ended up not helping the company at all. Alternative phone operating system vendors should think very carefully before building in Android app compatibility, lest they suffer the same fate as OS/2.

The story of OS/2 is now fading into the past. In today’s fast-paced computing environment, it may not seem particularly relevant. But it remains a story of how a giant, global mega-corporation tried to take on a young and feisty upstart and ended up retreating in utter defeat. Such stories are rare, and because of that rarity they become more precious. It’s important to remember that IBM was not the underdog. It had the resources, the technology, and the talent to crush the much smaller Microsoft. What it didn’t have was the will.|||

IBM doesn't make consumer, desktop operating systems anymore for a reason.