Wow. Just Wow. SendOwl has hit $250,000,000 in customer sales. That’s 1/4 billion dollars made by selling ebooks, indie video games, knitting patterns, fitness videos, even tiny house blueprints online. I still can’t wrap my head round such an amount. If you’re wondering what you could buy with that kind of money, as I was, the SendOwl celebratory blog post has a few ideas. But basically it’s a lot. It’s crazy to think back and see what a little side project I started nearly seven years ago has turned into. Really though, I’m most pleased for our customers.

In my years running SendOwl I’ve come across many seller stories. Of course there’s the rags to riches ones, but there’s also the “life was comfortable but I wasn’t happy” or “I was doing well but who wants a 2 hour commute to work each way every day” ones. And it’s these stories I think of when I reflect on what we’ve achieved at SendOwl. Sure, $250,000,000 is a lot of money. But how many people have we freed to follow their dream and break free from the 9-to-5? And how many more can we help in the years to come?

Encouragingly, I’ve noticed a changing of attitudes to running your own company/startup business/going freelance in the last 20 years. It used to be that if you didn’t work for big corp then poor you. With their glamorous offices, good fringe benefits and an easy life, then you’d be stupid not to. Big corp delivered for a while: it was a step up on the Victorian system after all. Then the world changed and people’s expectations changed but the way we worked failed to adapt. People like myself got pissed with the bureaucracy, the monotony, the lack of flexibility and the lack of opportunity to work on interesting stuff until 10,20 or 30 years into your career. Oh yes, and Governments kept increasing the retirement age (as they ran out of money due to poor planning but I digress) so there was no end to this in sight. Sod that.

Then, thankfully, the internet started to change things. Instead of being dependent on geography, background and exam skills for a successful education, you could learn outside the Government prescribed system. If you didn’t have a good start or changed your mind later in life (because who knows what they want to do with their life at 17?), then you could teach yourself a new skill. And suddenly you were no longer shoe-horned into that career choice for life you made one morning at 9.30am when you were 17, while attempting to make fart noises to get your mate in trouble with the teacher.

Starting your own business also became a lot easier. Previously you needed access to finance and legal knowledge about running a business. You were tied to your local bank, accountant and exams (which you thought you’d finished with). But then came the internet, giving you more choice, easily accessible information and tools that automated a lot of the work of running a business for you. Hell, if you wanted to sell physical goods you didn’t even need a warehouse anymore: just store it at Amazon and let them do the shipping. Starting up went from a $50,000-$250,000 exercise to a few hundred bucks. Or even $50, in my case. At that price it doesn’t matter if you fail and start over a few times.

People also wanted more flexibility in their lives and began to look for it outside the traditional labour market. Changing gender roles played a big part in this. Back in the day, guys were meant to be the breadwinners and women the care givers. It wasn’t fair for either party but the stereotypes were remarkably entrenched. Then change began to accelerate: women wanted to work, or needed to. Men actually wanted to see their kids and to have a life outside work.

So people began to look for work that offered them more flexibility. They still are looking. Whenever I get in an Uber (yes, it’s the most evil company in the world, I know, I’m sorry) I ask the driver why they do it. And 9 out of 10 times it’s the flexibility they love. And they really, really love that. I’ve talked to drivers who do it so they can spend more time with their kids, be more involved in their local community or look after a relative. I’ve even talked to one driver who was a manager at a multinational in the UK but jacked it in and started driving for Uber so he could home school his kids instead.

The main downside of our brave new Internet-powered world, however, is that Government policy has yet to catch up. The EU-driven VATMOSS rules are a wonderful example: a piece of legislation that was meant to lead to multinationals paying more tax but actually resulted in hundreds of thousands of small businesses struggling with the costs of compliance and, in many cases, avoiding it by not selling to the EU.

Next up, at least in the UK, the government increased tax rates for those running their own company. Previously the self-employed benefited from a slightly lower tax rate as they didn’t have the security or perks of full-time employment. This difference in the tax rate seemed fair to me, given the challenges of self-employment. But then the government decided that the self-employed were actually trying to dodge tax, influenced, no doubt, by the many politicians and celebrities who create a limited company with relatives as board members to avoid tax. But most self-employed people actually run a legitimate business. Why penalise the many for the dodgy actions of a few?

That’s politics though. Politicians go with what they know and surround themselves with big corp as that gets the “x thousand new job” headlines they crave. It’s very much a two-level playing field at the moment with entrepreneurs relegated to the B team. I’m hoping that will change. It needs to.

For those starting their own thing the internet means the whole world can potentially be your customer. So you only need to nail a niche to make a living. If you’re passionate about bank note design, doll clothes patterns or GPS offroad routes for 4x4s (all real SendOwl customers) then you can go for it. The internet makes your business viable, in a way that setting up shop in your local town would almost certainly not have been.

No matter how small your start up capital, where you live or what your background you can potentially turn your passion into your business. That’s big progress from a world where you had to move to find work (or stay unemployed in ‘rust belts’), suck up to contacts until you got a job, and sell stuff that your neighbours or boss— rather than you — cared about.

When I set out with SendOwl I wanted to build a digital delivery platform. What we’ve actually managed to do is allow thousands of people to live the life they want to. I couldn’t be happier.|||

Wow. Just Wow. SendOwl has hit $250,000,000 in customer sales. That’s 1/4 billion dollars made by selling ebooks, indie video games, knitting patterns, fitness videos, even tiny house blueprints…