Normal height. Normal weight. Normal cholesterol. Normal blood pressure. Normal, normal, normal. Just plan normal looking. Health is so much about trying to fit in. Shorts, pants and of course the dreaded summer bathing suit- I feel like I am constantly in the dressing room never satisfied with how I look. But, what are we really trying to fit into? I think it’s our ideal vision of ourselves, but how is that different than the ideal vision of health? Are these ideals close enough to touch or more divided than the grand canyon?

It can be all motivating, that obsessive need to fit in, look your best and of course, the narcissistic reward that comes with it. The challenge is that the ideal belief and even your ideal belief are constantly changing. They keep extending the finish line, we have no chance of playing this game. No one does.

Finding authenticity in health is really hard. White gloved professionals aside (Dr. Horse to the ER stat!), who you see every 6–12 months (at best), are tough to rely on for the day to day difficulties. Health requires more self reliance than any other discipline in your life.

Being yourself doesn’t start with health, but maybe it ends with it. Your meals, your exercise practices, your mental exploration create your health persona. Is yours a mix of guilt and cheeseburgers, sweat and SoulCycle or collection and meditation? Maybe all of the above? I hope so because being perfect is about as fun as steamed carrots and airplane chicken. It will keep you alive, looking good, but staler than an old piece of bread. Who wants a ham a cheese for lunch everyday? Try it, make mistakes and add some spice to sandwich, I would suggest some Sriracha!

Corevity | A Health Community for Millennials. A health community of beautiful people, images and experiences. We know you want to be healthy. We want to help. Coming spring 2017. Join our exclusive community.|||

Normal height. Normal weight. Normal cholesterol. Normal blood pressure. Normal, normal, normal. Just plan normal looking. Health is so much about trying to fit in. Shorts, pants and of course the…