In the interest of transparency, we have expounded on a few of the main contributing factors to the cancellation of Cephalocon.

The Ceph community has always been based on the principles of openness, inclusion, and a level playing field for all participants. We have worked hard to ensure that no matter , who you are , or how you are there is always a way for you to participate and contribute to the Ceph community.

It is our sincere hope that the people of the United States will course-correct their leadership to conform to the principles that the country was founded on, and has served so well throughout history. In the meantime, we wont be hosting any events that require members of our community to travel to the U.S. and potentially suffer harassment, digital privacy violations, or rejection at the border.

The Ceph project has always preferred to keep things simple and lightweight, and a full blown conference is definitely not lightweight. Our infrastructure (both personnel and technical) was definitely going to be put to the test to execute an event of this magnitude. So, rather than forge ahead and potentially deliver a conference experience that wasn’t up to the standards that we demand, we decided it would be better to focus on smaller, more agile, that were more suited to our community model.

The Ceph community has enjoyed long support from many of our community members, including our members. While many of these organizations were looking forward to helping us deliver a great event, we decided that we would prefer to encourage them to spend any sponsorship money on their own Ceph development and promotion efforts instead.

We would like to thank all of those who had submitted talks and committed to sponsorships. Our community enthusiasm is part of what makes the Ceph project such a great place to be.

If you have questions, comments, or concerns, feel free to contact , the Ceph community lead. Thank you to all of our users who have helped us to build a community of inclusiveness and a project and atmosphere we can be proud of.|||

