For the past few days, I have been thinking of applying data driven techniques in the field of cricket. I came up with the idea of this post a few days ago and started working right away. We will be looking at data driven bowling machines that bowl in areas where most batsmen get out and that have variation in their bowling speed as well. Such type of bowling machines can be very beneficial for batsmen as they can be made to play hard balls and mitigate their weaknesses. I do not have any experience with IOT, so we will just be going with a virtual machine inside our computer. What I want to demonstrate is the concept of data driven bowling machines to help batsmen lessen their shortcomings by playing good balls that are totally data driven.

The data I used for this project was of  1000 ODIs and T20s from last 10 years. I extracted all the balls that had a wicket. What we are interested in are the pitched heights and sides and speeds of these balls. In total, we got 8000 balls and after filtering just the fast and medium paced right hand bowlers, we are left with around 4000 balls. This was our data set. These 4,000 balls contained pitched ball height and side, original ball height and side and ball speed.

I used matplotlib animations module to write the script for this project. Data are extracted from the database. Afterwards, a random ball where a wicket had fallen is selected and its details are stored in variables. Then, the plot is created with animations. I have added the script in my github repository and you can have a look.

Lets take a look at the results. One thing to note here is that each balls is bowled with a different speed. If such a machine is built, it will throw slow balls at times and fast balls otherwise. Right now, I am just extracting raw data. We can also build a simple model that can learn to throw balls that usually get a wicket. This will make such machines intelligent.

The black dots are the original positions of the ball and the moving ball is how our machine will throw the ball.

That’s it. I hope you liked the post and the idea behind using data to make better bowling machines.

These visualizations can be filtered for a certain bowler or a batsman’s runs and wickets and can prove helpful to bowlers bowling against an opposition or batsmen playing against an opposition. These visualizations can also be made useful in many other ways.

If you have any questions or comments, feel free to post them.|||

Using data analytics and data visualizations to build cricket bowling machines that train a batsman better than ordinary bowling machines.