***Please read the article before commenting.

It’s quite remarkable how many verified statements we have regarding UFOs (unidentified flying objects) and extraterrestrials from people who have held the highest positions possible within the government, military, academia, politics and more. To be honest, it’s overwhelming, and when you put all of those statements together with all of the previously classified documentation that has been released over the past few years, it paints a startling picture. Anybody who has done even a fair amount of research, and adheres to the philosophy of “condemnation without investigation is the height of ignorance,” would not be able to deny this, and I have yet to come across someone who has done the research that still subjects this topic to the “conspiracy theory” realm.

To view a fraction of these verified quotes, and documents, more you can click HERE.

Below is an example, and a video I’ve used many times before, as it is an extremely powerful statement. I apologize if you’ve seen it before, but it really hits home. There really is an “abundant amount of evidence.”

Again, to view a fraction of these verified quotes, and documents, more you can click HERE. Apart from all the verified statements that come directly from the source, we also have statement made that cannot be completely verified, but are given a great deal of validity from some very credible people. These are also interesting and worth examining. Some of these quotes comes from Ben Rich.

Rich was the second director of Lockheed Skunkwork’s from 1975-1991. He’s been called the Father of Stealth, having overseen the development of the stealth fighter, the F-117A nighthawk. Before his death, Rich made several shocking open statements about the reality of UFOs and extraterrestrials.

“We already have the means to travel among the stars, but these technologies are locked up in black projects, and it would take an act of God to ever get them out to benefit humanity. Anything you can imagine, we already know how to do it.” (1)

“We now have technology to take ET home. No it won’t take someone’s lifetime to do it. There is an error in the equations. We know what it is. We now have the capability to travel to the stars.” (1)

“There are two types of UFOs — the ones we build and the ones ‘they’ build.” (1)

When Rich was asked how UFO propulsion worked, he said, “Let me ask you. How does ESP work?” The questioner responded with, “All points in time and space are connected?” Rich then said, “That’s how it works!”  (This seems to be related to Quantum entanglement, you can read more about that here.)

One of the sources is aerospace journalist, James Goodall, who wrote for publications such as Jane’s Defense Weekly, Aviation Week and Space Technology, and Interavia.  He is an accomplished speaker specializing in the history, development, and operations of the world’s only Mach 3 capable, manned air breathing aircraft, the SR-71 family of aircraft. (1) (source)(source)(source)

He is also an author, as well as the Associate Curator at the Pacific Aviation Meseum, HI. He was also the restoration manager at the Museum of Flight in Paine Field, Everett, WA.

Goodall interviewed many from the classified black budget world (read more about that world here.) He claimed that some of his contacts told him that “we have things out there that are literally out of this world, better than Star Trek or what you see in the movies.” (1)

From his work alone, James Goodall knew Ben Rich well. In a video interview, Goodall stated that he spoke to Rich approximately 10 days before he died:

“About ten days before he died, I was speaking to Ben on the telephone at the USC Medical Center in LA. And he said, ‘Jim, we have things out in the desert that are fifty years beyond what you can comprehend. They have about forty five hundred people at the Lockheed Skunk works. What have they been doing for the last eighteen or twenty years? They’re building something.'” (1)

Another source comes from John Andrews, who was a legendary Lockheed engineer. He had written to Rich, stating his own belief in UFOs, both manmade and extraterrestrial. Andrews has asked Rich if his own beliefs covered extraterrestrial as well as manmade UFOs. Rich’s reply was as follows:

“Yes, I’m a believer in both categories. I feel everything is possible. Many of our man-made UFOs are Un-Funded Opportunities. There are two types of UFOs, the ones we build, and the ones they build.” (1)

In Rich’s reply, he underlined the U, F, and O in “unfunded opportunities.”

Thirdly, Jan Harzan, a senior executive with IBM, along with Tom Keller, an aerospace engineer who has worked as a computer systems analyst for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, discusses a talk Ben gave some time ago. On March 23rd, 1993 at a UCLA School of Engineering talk where he was presenting a general history of Sunk Works, he said this:

“We now know how to travel to the stars. There is an error in the equations, and we have figured it out, and now know how to travel to the stars and it won’t take a lifetime to do it. It is time to end all the secrecy on this, as it no longer poses a national security threat, and make the technology available for use in the private sector. There are many in the intelligence community who would like to see this stay in the black and not see the light of day. We now have the technology to take ET home.” (1)

Here is a video of Jan telling the story:

Another source was Bill McDonalds, a forensic illustrator for the aerospace industry, and a good friend of John Andrews (mentioned above).  He stated that:

“It was Ben Rich’s opinion that the public should not be told. He believed they could not handle the truth, ever. Only in the last months of his decline did he begin to feel that the international corporate Board of Directors’ dealing with the ‘Subject’ could represent a bigger problem to citizens’ personal freedoms under the United States Constitution than the presence of off world visitors themselves.” (1)

Last but not least, Mr. Don Phillips, a CIA contractor who worked with Lockheed Skunkworks and the USAF. He was one of hundreds of other people with verified credentials who made headlines several years ago at a conference which took place at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C.

He confirms Ben Rich’s statements and beliefs in an interview that you can watch here.

The latest version of this type of major press conference was the Citizens Hearing on disclosure. It took place from April 29 to May 3, 2013 where researchers, activists, and military/agency/political witnesses representing ten countries gave testimony in Washington, DC to six former members of the United States Congress. Their testimony was about events and evidence which point to an extraterrestrial presence engaging the human race and the planet. You can read more about that here.

When it comes to the aerospace industry, UFOs are of high interest. For example, Mike Gold – Director of Operations for Bigelow Aerospace – was recently asked about Bigelow’s involvement with UFO reports. He stated that it’s an issue that “deserves serious attention,” and that he is glad someone is taking these UFO reports. He did mention that he cannot comment on what they do with the reports. (source)

Again, to view a fraction of verified quotes and documents, you can click HERE. I still thought these supposed statements by Rich were worth sharing, given the fact that we already have so many other ones that have been verified.|||

***Please read the article before commenting. It’s quite remarkable how many verified statements we have regarding UFOs (unidentified flying objects) and extraterrestrials from people who have held the highest positions possible within the government, military, academia, politics and more. To be honest, it’s overwhelming, and when you put all of those statements together with all of […]