In February 2016 staff at a Los Angeles hospital noticed that their computers weren’t working.1 Secretaries couldn’t access emails and had to communicate by fax or phone. Doctors couldn’t access electronic records. At least one patient had to go to another hospital. Others reported long delays. Computed tomography scans could not be done. The chief executive declared an emergency, and ambulances were diverted to other hospitals. Rumours surfaced, including that the hospital was being held to ransom for $3.4m (£2.6m; €3.1m), though the hospital denied this.23

Few people know what exactly occurred at the Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center. It is likely to have been a “phishing” expedition in which the bait was a fake email message and the prey was a healthcare employee. The virus—or “ransomware”—then infected and locked hospital computers. IT experts have said that the hospital may have itself turned off all the computers to prevent the infection spreading. After 10 days the hospital paid a smaller ransom of about $17 000 to regain use of its computers.4

Like any business people, the hackers using ransomware need to appear competent so that people and organisations pay them. Victims must trust the hackers to restore their data. An undercover investigation by one antivirus company found that ransomware groups offered to extend payment deadlines and to negotiate discounts (averaging 30%). One such group offered online support that responded within minutes to queries; another group told a victim, “I am glad you got your files back . . . Get a good antivirus.”5

Hollywood Presbyterian was the first hospital to admit paying a ransom, but other US hospitals, in California, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, and Texas, were targeted in 2016.6 The number of ransomware attacks rose fourfold from 2015 to 2016, and so did the amount of money paid to hackers, to $1bn, according to the FBI.7 In the UK, a third of NHS trusts have reported a ransomware attack.8

A few months ago on a Saturday night a nurse at Papworth Hospital near Cambridge clicked on a malicious link. Malware infected her workplace computer and started to encrypt sensitive files. Fortunately, the hospital’s daily data backup had just been completed. The IT director admitted that they were very lucky, saying, “Timing absolutely was everything for us.”9

Hospitals are ideal targets for ransomware companies. They have irreplaceable medicolegal records and data for an increasing number of day to day functions, from patients’ appointments to viewing imaging. Hospitals are probably more willing than other organisations to pay for quick recovery of their data.

Hospitals also hold confidential information about their patients, such as birth dates, addresses, insurance or social security details, and personal medical history. These personal data can be sold to other criminals for $10 a patient.10 This is about 10 times what can be earned by selling credit card details. Loss of these data also exposes hospitals to fines and loss of reputation—incentives to keep quiet.

Many hospitals use proprietary software that runs on ancient operating systems. Barts Health NHS Trust’s computers attacked by ransomware in January ran Windows XP.11 Released in 2001, it is now obsolete, yet 90% of NHS trusts run this version of Windows.

So what can hospitals and their workers do? Digital hygiene —that is, keeping hardware and software as secure as possible—is essential. This includes employees becoming less “click happy” when reading emails. Frequent backups are also important. Papworth Hospital now backs up data every hour and uses tape drives, which cannot be hacked digitally.

When attacks do occur, the IT department must be informed quickly. Much like containment of an infectious disease outbreak, a rapid response can isolate infected computers. One security company provides a free “hostage rescue manual” for responding to ransomware attacks.12 Hospitals should share data on attacks to stop them happening again. The same ransomware used against Hollywood Presbyterian was reused in a massive scam targeting US and Asian hospitals five months later.

We should be prepared: more hospitals will almost certainly be shut down by ransomware this year.|||

