I recently started out as a freelancer again. Within two weeks and a little effort I now have 5 decent leads a week. Here's how I did it.

Recently I started out as a freelancer again. It’s been going very well. If you’re a software engineer and thinking about going freelance, now seems definitely a good time and I believe it’s only getting better

Within two weeks, I had about 8 decent leads for contracts and/or consultancy gigs, here’s how I went about it:

The way I did it was fairly simple, I just kept on objective at the top of my mind, how can I lead users to my website and convert them into leads.

This is something that I’ve often heard from more experienced peers but never really bought into. Why would I want to specialize in any particular area when I love doing so many different things. It took me a while to figure it out but ultimately being a specialist has a bunch of advantages:

So to test my assumptions, what I did was launch two landing pages advertising two kinds of services, one more specialised, the other less so.

These landing pages were both just html, with assisting technology, I just needed to get it done the fastest way possible.

Then I threw some traffic at it (paid traffic - to save time) and looked at what performed best - number 2 in this instance. For number one it was hard to find good keywords for and so driving traffic to it was hard - and here I had my niche, react development.

Once I had tested those simple landing pages I started fleshing out the winner.

The idea for react.js focused services came from talking to recruitment agents, there just seemed to be a huge demand for react and react-native work out there.

It can just be a one-pager. However, a nicely designed website, that presents well the services you offer will give you a competetive advantage (especially as a freelance developer - since not many have a decent web-presence). A nice design doesn’t have to necessarily be aesthetically pleasing - just look at Noah Stokes’s website, it’s a ton of humour and also an internet sensation!

If you don’t want to deal with designing your website but have some money to spend, pay a decent designer $2000 for a kick-ass one pager. Reach out to me on twitter, I’m sure I can find someone, maybe I’ll even do it myself if I’m intruiged and have time on my hands!

The most important thing however is that the words on your website help conversion. Think of your website as your escalator pitch. Ideally you address the following concerns: - Pain - What problem are you solving for me the client? - Value proposition - How will my project/business improve by involving you? Give me tangible benefits, I’m a business owner! - Proof - How can I trust that what you claim is real? - Call to Action - How do I get in touch with you?

I encourage you to just google around and find a couple of ideas to steal, after all: “Good artists copy, great artists steal”!

People need to find you online. Here’s a list of things you can do to enable customers to find you:

Paid traffic, in combination with networking is really what got my freelance career to take off. From talking to peers about this who also freelance/consult I’m surprised that so few actually use paid traffic as a tool to get new customers. ou’re

Think about it - paid traffic is incredibly efficient for our kind of business because even if you spend $500 a month, and just get one or two good leads, it’s well worth the investment!

You’re not selling small-margin products, you’re selling a service, so a good lead could mean thousands or tens of thousands of dollars, depending on your rate and how long your client stays with you!

Converting customers is all about getting them to talk to you, the more you break down this barrier, the more customers you will convert.

I use a few techniques to convert visitors on my website to actual customers. However - the most effective tool I use to convert visitors is this: Drift (It’s a support tool with a chat-widget like intercom - thanks JP for recommending it! Drift is free for one user, so if you’re starting out, try integrate it on your landing page - it takes 10 minute to set up and it is so worth it!

Other ways for visitors to get in touch with me on my website are:

Don’t be afraid to put your rate up. Especially if you get a lot of requests it’s a sign that you’re not charging enough, that’s what happened to me - and it’s a great situation to be in!

For my business personally, although I’m not ready just yet, I’d like to move away from time-based billing and towards fixed price billing - because then I can charge for the value that I’m creating rather than the time I’m working on it. I highly recommend Jonathan Startks expensive problem, his newsletter (you can subscribe on the same page) and his book hourly billing is nuts - check it out!

Now let’s kick some ass! If you have any questions or feedback, please don’t be shy - it may just make my day!|||

