Greetings good sirs and madames. Today is Friday and here's the best JavaScript reads for your weekend! If you like this kind of stuff feel free to share some love on Twitter :)

After getting feedback from the community about webpack being hard to get started with, we listened and decided to re-envision the CLI for webpack. Although much of the logic from the old CLI was kept, a set of new features have been added: init and migrate.

In JavaScript, you can call a function with more arguments than the function expects. Therefore, Flow never complained about calling a function with extraneous arguments. We are changing this behavior.

ES6 modules are now supported in Chrome Canary — you’ll have to enable the Experimental Web Platform flag in chrome:flags. Chrome now joins many other modern browsers which also include support behind flags.

Adventures of an Ancient Web Developer in JavaScript Land | Hendrik Mans My friends, terrible things are afoot: I have been diving, no, delving into the wondrous world of JavaScript. Yes, JavaScript, the language and ecosystem I have been tirelessly mocking for the last decade or two! Shocking, I know.

In this article I would like to explain concept of higher-order functions and how they are omni-present in my favorite Javascript library: Lodash.

Mastering the Node.js Core Modules - The File System & the fs module | @RisingStack In this Node.js tutorial you can learn to use the File System core module, File Streams and some fs module alternatives the right way.

Didact: Learning how React works by building it from scratch We are going to build a working version of React keeping the code as simple as possible, sacrificing some features and lot of non-functional requirements.

With WebAssembly, it is possible to run code on the web faster. This article will help you understand what exactly it is about WebAssembly that makes it fast.

My first shot at generating an island didn't go well. Here's what it looked like: I was happy with it, nonetheless, but over the next 24 hours I would go on to learn a whole host of new techniques that would turn my poor excuse for an island into something that actually looked like an island. This post will follow my journey from nothing to something.|||

JavaScript algorithms, higher-order functions, Strict arity in Flow, and more