Are you planning to build your PC then you must know about the importance of choosing best thermal paste? A good thermal paste or thermal grease had a good texture and applied between the CPU and cooler. So, if you are assembling PC first time or an experienced person, we have listed down ten thermal paste comparison that works for every purpose.

The Arctic Silver 5 Thermal Paste is voted as the best thermal paste by customers. This coolant enhances the CPU performance and gives long-term stability to the CPU. Arctic Silver 5 contains pure silver particles that instantly sticks and works efficiently on high power computers.

This is the best thermal compound for CPUs available online for some reasons. ARCTIC MX-4 carbon-based thermal compound is easy to dispense and apply because of the syringe shape tube packaging. Just pump out the right amount of quantity on the chip, and it did in no time. You can easily mount the cooler immediately after the application of paste.

StarTechMetal Oxide Thermal CPU Paste is formulated with 20% metal oxide compounds, 30% Carbon Compounds and 50% silicone compounds that efficiently cools down the CPU. As it contains the high-quality metallic solution, the dissipation of heat generated by the CPU, so the machine performs better in comparison to thermal grease.

Noctua’s NT-H1 is a best CPU thermal paste containing a particular hybrid compound of different micro-particles, that have been specifically optimized to balance out PC environments. The thermal hybrid compound is easy to apply and works as a coolant giving long term stability to the PC.

The thermal paste comparison won’t be completed if Gelid Solutions GC-Extreme Thermal Compound is not included in the list. Available in the syringe form, this is a Non-Corrosive, Non-Curing & Non-Toxic thermal compound is easy to apply in CPU, doesn’t need curing time and comes at pocket-friendly price

CoolerMaster is a popular brand giving out fantastic coolers, PC chassis, and power supplies has come up with a good thermal paste that will fall in your budget. Cooler Master High-Performance Thermal Paste is filled with heat conductive metal oxide that promotes high-temperature stability, thermal conductivity, and low bleed.

IC Diamond 24 Carat comes in the list while having thermal paste review. The brand claims to have 94% of diamond particles in it. When it comes to having a good thermal conductivity, diamonds have proven to work five times more efficiently compared to silver. The IC Diamond 24 Carat Thermal Compound has a thermal conductivity of 2,000-2,500 W/mK, is non-capacitive electrically and non-conductive.

With superior thermally conductive non-curing compound, IceFusion is a must product to be included in thermal paste comparison. CoolerMaster Accessory IceFusion is an excellent coolant designed for CPUs. It reduces the heat and maintains a stable temperature even when the CPU is used at max level.

The Prolimatech PK-3 Nano Aluminum Thermal Compound promises to offer you best CPU thermal paste to prevent overheating of the computer. The package comes with a 1.5 grams easy-to-apply syringe which reduce the wastage and gives precise application.

Thermal Grizzly Conductonaut is a high-efficiency thermal grease paste comes in an easy-to-apply syringe in a quantity of 1.0g. This product efficiently works on cooling the CPU and gives 73 W/mK and thermal resistance of 0.0021 K/W.

With so many thermal paste products in the market, choosing the one product can be tough. As per the needs and comfortability, pick the thermal compound that is easy to apply. Don’t pick up a product that’s hard to apply or need quick application. The next thing is to check the cooling system of a computer. If you own a high-end cooler, use a thermal paste which reduced the heat to the maximum level. CPU thermal paste is a cheap product, but the pricing range is between 10-15$. Always pick the best thermal paste that works in an efficient manner for your computer and don’t cost much.

Choosing the best thermal compound for CPU is vital as the gray/silver compound keep the processor cooler. But, one need to be the pro at application on the top of the processor as you don’t want to damage other parts. In this article, we made thermal paste comparison and tried to give the most honest thermal paste review.|||

A thermal compound helps to improve conduction of heat from the CPU to cooler. Check this list of the best thermal paste for CPU & bottle up your processor.