Roughly, it began in the early 90s. Neil Papworth sent a short message, “Merry Christmas,” from his computer to a phone. The technology he utilized to take this monumental step is called Short Message Service (SMS), although it’s better known today as texting or chatting. However, do we literally SMS each other day today? Why would we? When we have better apps that help us text or chat in convenient ways.

Now where texting is concern, there is a recent invention that’s trending — it’s called acronyms. I’m sure there are few you may be aware of; however, in my blog today I’m going to discuss with you the most trending acronyms that are heading the way.

We all want to know what’s trending today? Who doesn’t want to walk with current trends? Acronyms are one among the current trends.

Today, people use trendy text lingos to get their point across. They feel acronyms are easier than typing everything out and they get their point across. Some people worry about grammar and spelling, but the reshaping and playing with words has strengthened some language skills. Also, it’s considered a new way to be creative and have fun with words.

Below are jargons that have been rolling off today and generally floating around the Internet lately.

ROFL: “Rolling on the floor laughing” Often used during funny conversations.

OOTD: “Outfit of the day” Commonly used when you post a picture with a good outfit.

BAE: “Babe/Before Anyone Else” It’s a term usually used instead of “babe”.

IRL: “In Real Life” If you want to talk about something in your real life, the qualifier “IRL” is enough to let people know.

The list goes on. I’m sure you are aware of many more. Do share the one’s you frequently use in our comment box below.

As the new-age internet slang words started dominating the way, this is your time to be trendy and catch the current wave. If you want to go with the flow and get along with life today you must be equipped with all up-to-date styles.

Let me tell you, LYK is the newest style for you. This is a unique online social network with privacy you must get into. Download now — https://goo.gl/XUpbre|||

Roughly, it began in the early 90s. Neil Papworth sent a short message, “Merry Christmas,” from his computer to a phone. The technology he utilized to take this monumental step is called Short…