Given the thoroughly niche status they now occupy, it is hard to recall that text adventures were once at the forefront of video gaming—let alone that they were heralded by an optimistic few as the dawn of a new literature. But for a brief time in the mid-nineteen-eighties major literary publishers, including Simon & Schuster and Random House, opened software divisions, and major bookstores stocked works of “interactive fiction.” Popular writers, including Douglas Adams and Thomas M. Disch, turned their capable hands to the burgeoning form. It was in the midst of this excited moment that the future three-term U.S. Poet Laureate Robert Pinsky wrote a video game called “Mindwheel,” which, as Pinsky told me recently, over email, he is still proud of. “I look on it as part of my life’s work in writing,” he said.

Synapse Software had been founded just a few years before, in 1981, and was looking to enter the interactive-fiction market. Ihor Wolosenko, the co-founder of the company, told me over Skype that he had an idea for a narrative experiment: he wanted to get a novelist, a playwright, and a poet to each write a text adventure and to see what these different types of writer would separately bring to the form. Wolosenko was familiar with and liked Pinsky’s poetry, and Pinsky was located nearby in Berkeley, California—a combination of geographical convenience and critical appreciation that would make him Wolosenko’s first (and, as it turned out, only) choice for the poet role in his experiment. Pinsky was happy to receive the invitation, attracted both to the novelty of the project and the challenge of writing for a broader audience.

Pinsky quickly came to enjoy working with his programming collaborators, Steve Hales and Cathryn Mataga, and he liked the atmosphere at the Synapse office enough that he made excuses to hang out there. In conversation, he compared Hales to the literary critic Francis Fergusson: both men, he said, possess “an acute, practical, deep sense of action as a movement of the soul.” There were, nonetheless, some mild creative differences: Wolosenko wanted something “highbrow,” Pinsky has said, an “electronic novel,” while he “liked the idea that it was an entertainment, that it was a game.” The resulting product—which, thanks to Hales, you can now play online, for free—is a playful mishmash of sci-fi tropes, Pop surrealism, and allusions both high and low: the work of a poet having fun, but still the work of a poet. After all, Pinsky pointed out to me, “allusion” and “ludicrous” both come from the Latin ludere, meaning “to play.”

Pinsky was at a transitional moment in his poetic career, moving from the discursive, coolly rational style of “Essay on Psychiatrists” and “An Explanation of America” toward a more enigmatic mode of questioning lyricism. “Mindwheel” plays like an absurdist response to the poems he was then writing: both the game and his 1984 collection “History of My Heart” attempt, Pinsky told me, “to relate the large forces of history to the dimensions of an individual human life.” “Mindwheel” does this literally, by having the player traverse the minds and memories of four deceased individuals—loosely based on major historical figures—using what the game calls a “neuro-electronic matrix.” The goal is to retrieve the titular mindwheel, which “contains the secret of the world’s best values.”

Although they occasionally employ illustrations, text adventures typically consist of words alone: a scene or place is described on-screen, and the player responds by typing in commands. Early titles were limited to simple verb-noun inputs (“WALK EAST,” “GET LAMP,” “KILL DWARF,” etc.), but the grammatical complexity of the form expanded along with the games’ popularity. “Mindwheel” is relatively complex, requiring Pinsky to write elaborate verb-implementation tables, which he adored. But, much to his dismay, “Mindwheel” would be published with an accompanying book. “I didn’t like it; I resisted it,” he told Jason Scott, for “GET LAMP,” a documentary about text adventures. “I wasn’t particularly excited by the romance of having a book.” The book is credited to Richard Sanford, though Nick Montfort, an academic authority on interactive fiction and a former pupil of Pinsky’s, claims that Pinsky himself wrote most of it and asked to be uncredited. (Pinsky and Wolosenko both said they couldn’t remember whether Pinsky wrote any of it.) It contains an assemblage of fictitious interviews, poems, and other textual scraps, which supply the game’s narrative backdrop.

The book explains the futuristic, near-apocalyptic setting of “Mindwheel,” freeing the game to open swiftly, with the player lying “face up on a table in the stark laboratory.” Someone called Dr. Virgil asks, “Are you ready to begin your journey?” If you are, he “flicks a row of circuit breakers,” and you awake “on an immense stage,” backed by a chorus of singers in front of a roaring crowd. You are inside the mind of the rock star “Bobby Clemon,” and you watch—or, rather, as with all of this, the text tells you that you watch—as his assassination plays repeatedly on an enormous video screen. You are given no further instructions. The game has a dreamlike logic: the fun has as much to do with working out what to do next as how to do it. Later, you explore the mindscape of a poet, which takes the form of a sleazy bar full of fornicating insects, and that of a dictator, clearly modelled on Hitler, which is populated by murderous children, uniformed lizards, and winged people locked in an internment camp. The fourth and final mind that you explore belongs to an Einstein-like scientist, and there the imagery draws heavily on “Alice in Wonderland.” Tragedy and farce mingle freely.

The game was the first of Pinsky’s many collaborative projects, and Pinsky himself has frequently cited it as a prelude to his translation of Dante’s Inferno. There is, of course, Dr. Virgil, an obvious nod, though we only encounter him at the beginning and the end of the game (and also on the “game over” screen, which you will likely see many times). The closest we get to an actual guide is not Dr. Virgil but a toad, whose sole act of interpretation consists of disparagement: when you encounter a puzzle based on a sonnet by the Renaissance poet Fulke Greville (wonderfully adapted, by Pinsky, from pentameter to tetrameter, to fit the restrictions of an average computer monitor), the toad says, “Big deal poem … it’s just about being afraid of the dark.”

Pinsky’s key reference point for the game is not Dante but a poem of his own: “The Figured Wheel,” a fragment of which appears in the accompanying “Mindwheel” book (though Pinsky’s name, which appears in the poem, is replaced by Dr. Virgil’s). It’s a big American list poem, enumerating everything from “shopping malls” to “demi-Gods,” a set of objects that come to be ground up by a terrifyingly ambiguous “figured wheel.” Critics generally take the wheel to represent some large, possibly creative, process, but which process precisely is up for debate: history, culture, the writing of poetry? The poem ends on a note of seeming futility, paralleling the bafflement you may experience in trying to understand it. One of the defining quirks of the text adventure is that, regardless of how advanced a game’s vocabulary is, you will inevitably come across a verb or command it cannot grasp; anyone who has suffered the constant variations of “I don’t understand” that punctuate these games knows that the text adventure is the perfect platform for an epistemological crisis.

As computers advanced, and graphics became easier and less expensive to create, text adventures died as a commercial proposition. Pinsky never wrote another piece of interactive fiction—though he continued to think about poetry and computers, examining the “interesting infancy” of their relationship, and the “particular genius” inherent to both mediums, in “The Muse in the Machine: Or, the Poetics of Zork,” a short essay published in the Times in 1995. In 2010, Electronic Arts released an action game based on Dante’s Inferno; it garnered faint praise from the gaming community (it was deemed too similar to the “God of War” series) and was mostly derided by those literary scholars who noticed it (the key issue for them: Beatrice had become a damsel in distress). Pinsky was asked to review the game, he told me, but declined—not out of scorn or scholarly outrage but because the game was “pretty dull,” in his view, “conventional.” Worse than distorting Dante, for his work will survive all dreadful adaptations, the game just kind of sucked.

“Mindwheel,” meanwhile, is stronger as a script than it is as an interactive experience. Wonderful as it is to imagine thousands of teen-age game-players striving to find the missing words to a poem, the various puzzles feel like obstacles to the imaginative world in which they occur. During the game’s production, those puzzles prompted one of the few disagreements between Pinsky and his collaborators: he wanted more dialogue, more exploration, and fewer obstacles to either. As it happens, several puzzle-free, story-driven games—“The Stanley Parable,” “Gone Home,” “Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture”—have been released in the last few years, to considerable acclaim. Whether these truly herald “the real future of electronic literature,” as one reviewer suggested, it is, of course, too early to say. Progress is scarcely linear; the figured wheel keeps on rolling.|||

James Reith looks back at Robert Pinsky’s “Mindwheel” and the brief rise of “interactive fiction” in the nineteen-eighties.