Porn is a private affair. You might sometimes watch it with your partner, but even so, you wouldn’t want to be interrupted by an unwelcome visitor.

Now, with VR porn headsets, which completely isolate users from their surroundings, the chances of getting caught with your pants down are even riskier.

It’s a worry that’s making fans look for new ways to protect their modesty.

One (pretty NSFW) Reddit thread shines a light on the kind of solutions some VR users are already dreaming of, with door sensors, cameras, and VR headset notifications proving popular.

“Please create something where I can put a [sensor] near the front door so when it opens I get a pop-up text in my VR game telling me someone is coming,” pleads one. “I don’t care if this whole setup costs $100. I will buy it.”

Others point out that there ought to be a way to interact with someone who’s immersed in a VR experience – whether they’re watching porn or not.

“You can’t just tap on their shoulder,” they say.

Luckily, adult website Pornhub says its already working on an answer. Vice president Corey Price told Mic that it’s “currently working on a few prototypes to help solve this issue.”

These won’t be some crude ‘Do Not Disturb’ deterrent, he added, but rather a smart device “that will serve as an effective means to alert individuals using VR headsets that there is a visitor fast approaching, providing them with ample time to … readjust.”

CamSoda too, said it was looking for a solution to ensure “trepidations remain at bay”, while xHamster has already created a working prototype.

“As soon as the device identifies an intruder — boom! — the porn disappears,” said Alex Hawkins, xHamster’s VP of Marketing.

Although it’s clear that the porn industry is aware of the privacy problem, it may yet be a while before products are actually released.

So just remember, masturbation is natural for both men and women – not something to be ashamed of; make sure (if you’re in a relationship) you both have a healthy open attitude towards self-pleasure.

And if you live with a flatmate, get a good old-fashioned lock on your door.

Read more: VR porn is exploding – everywhere but little Britain

Read more: How To Boss It Like… Ela Darling, VR porn pioneer|||

Solving the big problem with VR porn.