In the midst of all the gloom surrounding Snap, Inc.’s stock’s nose-dive after their Q1 earnings call this week, I wanted to share why I’m long on Snap:

If you go to a venue where teenagers hang out — say an 18+ music venue so that most of the place is full of 18–21 year olds (they can’t get into other 21+ spots, duh!) and observe the apps that you see them using, Snapchat beats anything else hands down. Sure, Instagram stories caught like fire, and it already has more users (200M monthly uniques versus Snapchat’s 160M), I’m still highly curious to see what % of the 13–21 demographic converted to Instagram stories. I’m extrapolating 13–18 from 18–21, but still my guess would be a very small number — because it’s very hard to change the culture of a network. Instagram has always been a curated version of you, and although Instagram did a really good job to allow people to block certain users from viewing their story, a teenager doesn’t want to risk putting something up, only to find out later that their 50 year old uncle also viewed it. Snapchat has always been the private space where just your actual friends hangout — where you can be comfortable sharing anything without any judgements, especially from your parents. Don’t get me wrong: everyone loves their parents, but there are parts of any teenager’s life that they’d rather not share with them, and hence I’d bet they aren’t going anywhere…

One of the biggest potential problems with Snapchat as it grew would’ve been your parents (eventually) signing up for it, and then pestering you to accept their friend requests, or even share your stories with them. This happened with Facebook and it’s the same reason why I don’t use it any more — it’s a directory of everyone I know, and unless I want to share something with everyone I know, I don’t post it on Facebook. Snapchat, on the other hand, feels like a safe haven with 15 of my closest friends, and I’m okay sending them frivolous shit all the time.

Instagram is going to be the new Facebook — I’ll only share the photos and stories I want everyone and their mom to be seeing on Instagram, but for my most intimate communications with my closest friends, Snapchat is still going to be the tool of my choice. This is true even now — a good chunk of my friends use both Instagram stories and Snapchat, and the content they send out on Snapchat is much more authentic, prolific & engaging than the cultivated persona they nurture on their Instagram stories.

More friends/audience doesn’t equate with how much time I spend in an app. There are way too many avenues for broadcasting my life to everyone — top two being Facebook and Instagram. Teenagers, and for that matter, everyone yearns for smaller private spaces where they can share whatever they want with their closest friends. My generation uses messenger groups, my mom’s generation uses Whatsapp groups, my grand mom’s generation uses email chains — but the point is that as these teenagers grow older, the tight knit nature of the Snapchat network is going to keep it more attractive over a network like Facebook. And, from what I see, the amount of time spent on an app is highly correlated with not the size of the audience, but also on the depth of your relationships with other nodes on that network.

Let’s just use the latest thing from Snap as an example: I have been using Snap Spectacles for about 2 months at this point. When you take out your phone and point at someone, your subject changes. It reminds me of this little thing I learned back in school:

This applies so well to capturing your daily life on a camera — you can either precisely experience a person’s reactions to (or emotions about) a certain thing, or precisely capture the person on camera, but not both. For instance, it’s nearly impossible to capture someone’s real reactions when they meet you, since if you have a phone pointing at them, they will suddenly adjust to make sure they present their camera-self, not their actual-self. (and probably call you a weirdo later for walking in with a camera!)

At least today, you can actually capture someone’s real emotions or reactions because despite the spinning recording indicator on Spectacles, almost no one realizes that they are being recorded. This will probably change over time as Spectacles become more common, but by then, it would be an acceptable behavior to just let yourself be since the videos captured on this new camera don’t leave the very private network of your friends.

In conclusion, I’ve loved Snap as a company for a long time, and I like their pitch of using innovation as a moat: they have consistently innovated in the consumer web space every year since their founding (Ephemerality, Stories, AR filters, Memories, Spectacles), and have a core set of users who really really love it, and would be the last ones to die. (Sorry, that got dark real quick!)|||

In the midst of all the gloom surrounding Snap, Inc.’s stock’s nose-dive after their Q1 earnings call this week, I wanted to share why I’m long on Snap: If you go to a venue where teenagers hang out…