For those who know what Prezi is, we all agree it is a great software. People who are unaware of Prezi, it is a productivity app based on the cloud. It creates presentations in complete contrast to traditional presentations, making your presentations more dynamic and interactive. While Prezi has an array of great features, there are other alternatives to Prezi in the market for those who are looking for something different while creating presentations. The other whiteboard animation software available might be different but still are pretty great options depending on what kind of presentations you want to build. So let us go through the list of the presentation websites like Prezi, which are great alternatives to Prezi.

Sparkol Videoscribe is an appreciable alternative to Prezi. This whiteboard software is almost intuitive to use with a large range of effects and customization options. It even provides a sound library so you can add some royalty-free music to your video. Moreover you can stop and renew your subscription whenever you feel like.

A few features to look out for before you subscribe to Videoscribe

Goanimate is a presentation website like Prezi, and uses an innovative DIY approach which gives you control over every feature, and in spite of everything it saves time as compared to other software for whiteboard animation and presentation! A few great features of Goanimate include-

This is a great option for a unique way to display the slides of a presentation. With this Prezi alternative, you have regular text editing capabilities along with a spell checker that corrects you as you type.

Though Emaze has a lot of features that make it a worthwhile option, here are a few points you need to look at before you opt for it.

The viewer analytics features are not yet available for Emaze, which gives it a slight disadvantage. Lots of features in Emaze only work if you upgrade to a paid subscription, therefore it may be inconvenient if you are looking for high customization with lots of varieties to choose from. All your presentations are made publicly accessible on Emaze, which could result in a loss of privacy of your work and plagiarism issues. Emaze doesn’t save your work automatically, which can be a big bother as all your hard work could vanish in a second in case of any unfortunate accident. Not everything on a slide is editable when you are using Emaze, which might cause frustration as the customization is limited. You cannot save the presentation for offline use The font type of text used in the presentation cannot be changed.

Powtoon is a free alternative to Prezi which specialises in making quick presentations when you’re short of time. It offers loads of images and templates to help you make an amazing presentation.

Powtoon has a lot to offer, but there are a few things you should remember while working with it.

RawShorts is a video presentation website, and one of the great Prezi alternatives. It incorporates custom video templates that give your presentation a unique feel.

Kingsoft has introduced Presentation as a free Prezi alternative. It is perhaps one of the best free presentation software to work with. It is very easy to use and has both common and advanced presentation characteristics.

Kingsoft Presentation has an intuitive interface, with dynamic slides having flash, sound and animation features, as well as a variety of uniquely artistic backgrounds to choose from. Kingsoft Presentation works with all common file formats, as well as switch back and forth from Microsoft. You can open multiple slide pages on a single window interface so there is no need to switch among presentation windows. The download size of the presentation is very small so it can be easily accessed and transferred to view The print preview feature in this software allows you to clearly see how the printout will look if you choose, for different print styles, including more than one slide on a single page. You can initiate an email to a recipient from within this program itself, making it very convenient to send presentations to all those concerned. A side menu in this software makes it really straightforward to open different panels for layouts, themes, shapes, transitions, etc Speaker notes and comments can be added to slides

Though it has a vast majority of value-for-money features, there are a few characteristics that also need to be kept in mind:

Zoho Show has a great variety of functions that allow you to add slides, create whiteboard animations, presentations, add sounds and video in order to develop a presentation that can be used by you personally or on the Internet. The manifold features of Zoho Show include:

An automatic save function that reduces your worries. You can work without worrying about saving every new addition to your presentation It’s interface gives a very natural feel, and you can easily create amazing presentations The software has very well-organized menus, so all the elements you need come in order and there is no confusion while creating a presentation You can easily import and export presentations made in Zoho Show to popular file formats, making it easy to present on other devices Zoho Show also allows you to insert YouTube videos directly into your presentation, which means you can now give more life to your presentation with the required dynamic material If you are need to broadcast a live presentation remotely to others, Zoho Show can help you out! The app provides you with a link that can be given to your recipients and when they click the link they can view your presentation while you’ll have full control of the presentation remotely. Another handy characteristic of Zoho show is that you can restore the past versions of your presentation if you require them! Your presentation can be shared publicly or privately, completely depending on your preference!

Though these should be more than enough to sway your mind, keep a lookout for this con which is also present in Zoho Show:

This website is a cloud-based online Prezi alternative, and a direct evolution of all traditional presentation systems, combining speed and customization to hand you beautiful presentations.

The free version of this software allows you to publish your presentation as a URL only, meaning it can only be viewed in your browser. However, if you upgrade to a  paid version, you are given the option to download your presentation and run it offline. The paid version also exports completed presentations in PPT or PDF format, lets you record audio that you can use as commentary, and preserves multiple versions of slides that you create.

However there are a few shortcomings to Sliderocket as well:

The world of presentation websites is rapidly expanding, with each option giving you the freedom to do something while not providing you with some other feature. Based on what you desire to achieve with your presentations, you can select one or even multiple alternatives. We hope this list of the similar software to Prezi was helpful to you.|||

If you are looking for the similar software like Prezi, then check these top 8 Prezi alternatives and let your presentation work speak for you.