Kuala Lumpur, April 17th 2017: SKOWT, an innovative new music platform which caters to unsigned and independent talents, launched the SKOWT MUSIC FUND in a partnership with VIMA Music Awards.

The SKOWT Music Fund, will be used to help fund and subsidise Malaysian musicians to record and produce their songs. With a shared passion for helping unsigned artists, both companies hope the SKOWT Music Fund will further enable local artists to showcase their talent worldwide. The fund will start with an initial amount of RM20,000 and 3 talented musicians will stand to benefit from the 1st round of disbursement.

“There are many musicians out there who have amazing talent but frequently face a challenge in being recognised for their work. Having a professionally recorded track is very helpful in getting discovered and recognised but unfortunately, this can be a costly investment for many musicians. We have therefore partnered with VIMA to establish a music fund to help these musicians. The SKOWT fund will initially concentrate on musicians from Malaysia and gradually increase the scope to Asia and then globally. We hope that the talented musicians will benefit from the fund and help them gain the recognition they truly deserve”.

VIMA Music Awards, one of the biggest talent recognition platforms in the world, originally conceptualized the music fund in 2010, and will spearhead the efforts to identify and screen the talents before submitting recommendations to SKOWT for each round of funding.

“We have done this in the past in Malaysia by funding unsigned music acts such as Lethal Doses and Kraft, and our music fund concept was applied recently in the Philippines too. However, what is truly exciting is to have a music technology platform partner, who are genuinely in the business of helping musicians to elevate, to create innovative ways to promote their talent and also to embrace the whole element of giving back. These are the key elements that helped us to make a decision to forge a partnership with SKOWT to build the fund into something even bigger and more exciting.

All musicians who are funded under the SKOWT Music Fund, will be encouraged to give 10 percent of their song earnings to be put back into the fund and to help fund another musician. And that’s what we love about this whole concept of the music fund that hopefully never dries up and continues to help develop musicians. We will also be talking to potential sponsors or corporations who wish to join us in helping to develop the fund in Malaysia and across the region.”

SKOWT enables unsigned artists to upload their songs and biography online, giving them the opportunity to connect with streaming music fans, other artists, licensing managers and event organizers. The platform is free to use and open to all independent artists or unsigned bands, regardless of their genre, language or location. The only registration requirement is that the artist must not be signed to any record labels. All of the music on SKOWT are uploaded by the artists themselves, which makes it the ideal app for music fans, managers and media seeking new talent. Listeners will have the chance to like or dislike songs and build playlists. Based on the songs with the most likes and listens, SKOWT will build a Top 10 chart.

VIMA (which stands for Voice International Music Awards) is considered the most important and anticipated music award in South-east Asia. Launched in 2008, the awards has become a benchmark for many awards platform across the globe and often acts as a launch pad for music acts tipped to be the next big thing. Some of the past winners include Yuna, Altimet, The Great Spy Experiment (Singapore), Joe Flizzow, Project E.A.R (Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Indonesia), Prema Yin, K-Town Clan, Ze Rebelle, Sasi The Don, Alex Subryn, An Honest Mistake, Inch Chua (Singapore), Feez Madea (Brunei), Electrico (Singapore), Pop Shuvit, Melissa Indot and many more.|||

