The Power Of Doing Only One Thing

And thus we write content drafts, text our friends, reply to emails and check our Facebook feed, simultaneously. All the time.

Tell me you don’t do that.

I know, you do it.

Hell, even while reading this you’ve got multiple browser tabs open, haven’t you?

Let me guess: one of them is Gmail, other maybe Facebook or Twitter and a Google doc maybe.

Don’t worry or feel guilty. Everyone does it.

So did I. Until recently — when I realized why multi-tasking is NOT good for us, in the long run.

And today, I’ll try to convince you Why You Should Quit Multi-tasking & concentrate on a single task at a point of time.

Nope. Read on, let me clarify:

Our brains aren’t meant to perform two or complex tasks at the same time.

By complex tasks I mean, working on an important project, checking out Facebook feed and replying to emails.

…or Driving while talking to a person on the phone.

You can eat a gum and walk at the same time. No problem with that.

I know, we can work on an important project and check-out Facebook feed simultaneously.

But, that’s exactly what we aren’t supposed to do.

Effectively this means you can only concentrate on one task at a time and when other tasks seek attention you’ve to switch from your current task to the new task.

“In effect, you’ve got writer’s block briefly as you go from one task to another. You’ve got to (a) want to switch tasks, you’ve got to (b) make the switch and then you’ve got to © get warmed back up on what you’re doing”,

According to David E. Meyer, Professor at the University of Michigan and is Chair of the Cognition and Cognitive Neuroscience area of the Psychology Department.

The point of multi-tasking was trying to do more in less time, right?

We aren’t achieving that, it seems.

When you switch between tasks rigorously, like checking your email, it takes more than 60 seconds to switch back to your previous task. And not just that, you’ve lost your FOCUS.

The human brain, with its hundred billion neurons and hundreds of trillions of synaptic connections, is a cognitive powerhouse in many ways.

Multitasking lowers Your IQ and Damage your Brain

According to a study at University of London cognitive multitasking led to a drop in IQ score by almost 15 points, a result equivalent to those who smoke Marijuana or stay up all night. This is equivalent to an IQ score of an 8 year old.

These damages were believed to be temporary, only until a study from University of Sussex revealed otherwise.

Researchers at the University of Sussex in the UK compared the amount of time people spend on multiple devices (such as texting while watching TV) to MRI scans of their brains. They found that high multitaskers had less brain density in the anterior cingulate cortex, a region responsible for empathy as well as cognitive and emotional control.

All in all Multi-tasking doesn’t sound that “cool” now, does it?

If it still does, you ought to seriously consult a doctor.

But researchers, since the dawn of our knowledge era have been saying “Multitasking ain’t good, boy”.

Studies from researches conducted 15–18 years ago still remains relevant and will continue to do so as we cannot rewire our brain to do something it can’t.

“We are under the impression that we have this brain that can do more than it often can,” in René Marois’ own words.

So, how do you fix it all?

“We’re designed for Singular tasking, and we got to stick to it”

In case you’re not into multi-tasking yet (which is highly unlikely), but in case, do not walk this path. You’re in the right direction.

Here are some things you can do to ensure you’re not consumed by multi-tasking:

I write at GrowingMetrics about Blogging and Internet Marketing. Recently I’ve been reading and writing a lot about Productivity, Motivation and Self-Improvement. I’d LOVE to share best, free tips from around the web. Sign-up for the FREE stuff, if you’re interested. I loathe spam and promise to provide only the best content.|||

And thus we write content drafts, text our friends, reply to emails and check our Facebook feed, simultaneously. All the time. And today, I’ll try to convince you Why You Should Quit Multi-tasking …