This is a step by step guide to make money with UC We- Media Program. With UC We- Media Program we can earn a decent amount regularly. This program is introduced by the well known android browser called UC browser. Just by writing trending articles we can earn money with UC We-Media Program.

Enter your Email Id and type your password and confirm password by entering again.

If you have invitation code then enter it otherwise leave blank.

Then it will send email for verification.

Go to your email and check whether you got an email from UC We-Media Program or not.

If you didn’t get it then click on “send again”

If got email then click on the link which they sent to your email and activate your account.

Now type your account name.

Select category on which you want to write articles.

Enter account operator name. This name should match with your PAN card Name.

If you have website then enter website address.

It takes to the next page i.e. Account Status.

It takes 1 or 2 days to accept your account.

How to write article in UC We- Media Program:

If your account is approved then you can start writing articles. You can write article in any one of selected category.

Now enter the title of your article.

While writing article keep in mind that, article should be unique and well written.

See that at least one picture included in your article.

If your article is not up to standards it gives you some suggestions.

According to suggestion just change your article and then “save”

Now you are ready to publish your first post.

After you submit your first post, UC News team will check your article.

After UC News team approval your first post will be published in UC News stream.

If you want to make money you have to apply for Ad Monetization program.

If you apply for this ad program, whenever you write an article the ad will be displayed in your article.

Through this adds only you are going to make money with UC We- Media Program.

In order to apply for ad monetization program, you should have below mentioned points.

Your account should be at least 7 days old.

One of your articles should have at least 2000 views.

When to withdraw money from UC We- Media Program?

Once you reached $50 in your account. You are able to withdraw money from account to your bank.

I believe that this guide helps you to make money with UC We- Media Program.|||

This is a step by step guide to make money with UC We- Media Program. With UC We- Media Program we can earn a decent amount regularly.