While casually browsing my daily notifications on Koodous I found banking malware on Google Play, which has many new banking app targets in its configuration. A new sample was flagged by one of my BankBot rules: Funny Videos 2017. It struck me as different than the usual BankBot samples since it was tagged as using DexProtector, a tool to heavily obfuscate APKs. In addition the app name wasn't the usual popular name (i.e. Flash Player, HD Coded or Google Play Update), so I figured I'd check it out a bit more. 

 

 Looking at the names of the activities and other manifest items it seemed like a normal app with inserted malware. I had read about another sample of the malware recently that was inserted into an existing app and uploaded to Google Play, so I figured I would check Google Play just to be sure. Still to my surprise it was actually there in Google Play. 

 

 

 Figure 1: Funny Videos 2017 app in Google Play (update: no longer available) 

 

 Apparently the app was updated recently (April 8, 2017) and this was most likely when the malware was added. I reported the app through their reporting system but at the time of writing it is still available in Google Play. As you can see it does appear to have 1k to 5k installs, which isn't much for a normal app, but quite a lot for malware (at least compared to the installation counts we've seen so far on other mobile banking malware). 

 

 

 Figure 2: additional Google Play app info 



It is known that this technique has been used before, but is there anything interesting about this sample besides that it is available in Google Play? One of my co-workers was eager to look into it so he decided to run it on a device and captured some traffic: 

 

 

 

 Looking at the data that came from the server I immediately noticed the '<tag>[obfuscated data]</tag>' format that I had run into earlier so I started searching for the code to deobfuscate it. Since the DexProtector obfuscated APK takes some time to deobfuscate and most malware doesn't update very quickly I decided to get a recent BankBot sample that wasn't obfuscated this heavily to obtain the deobfuscation routine. I ended up using sample 7c2e913571dad579fc8fa3a03171cf523e86a0686e1ba14f277da33569410646 for this purpose since it's very recent (March 28, 2017) and also had the '/private/inj_lst.php' request URL inside it. I cleaned up the deobfuscation routine from the sample a bit and ended up with the following code: 

 

 

 

 The key in the sample used for comparison ended up being the same as used in the Google Play sample, so I was lucky enough not to have to spend any additional time figuring that out. Throwing the obtained server data into the Java code and running the program resulting in the deobfuscated data containing a list of all apps that are targeted. 

 

 To our surprise the list was more extensive than expected and for the first time contained some new Dutch targets including ABN, Rabobank, ASN, Regiobank, and Binck. The full list can be found below. After seeing one of our customers on the target list we decided to update our detection signatures so we can now also detect this sample in our effort to prevent online banking fraud. I guess the game has started once again after some nice and quiet period. So far I have no reason to believe the functionality of the malware is significantly different from the previous samples, but I'll have a closer look at it. 



Google has decided to take the app out of the Play Store. As it turns out, the malware is mostly phishing for credit card details and internet banking credentials. Screenshots of some of the phishing overlays can be seen in the image below. 

 

 

 Figure 3: collection of overlays 





 CSD for Android performs detection against rogue apps and Android overlay attacks for the latest Android malware families, like Marcher and Slempo. Protection is delivered via our mobile/client component that easily integrates into your native Android apps. Launched soon to protect millions of banking customers in the Netherlands. 

 

 For organizations also interested in detecting Android banking malware on customer devices, please contact for a demo to learn how our CSD solution can adaptively detect emerging mobile and web banking Trojan threats. 

 

 https://clientsidedetection.com 

 https://twitter.com/sfylabs 

|||

