Apple is known to run its own range of software and operating system, which enables the user to perform numerous functions and run number of applications designed by Apple. Apple Pay is a tool used with the devices you use daily. With the help of this feature, you can easily make your payments with your credit and debit cards. You can use Apple Pay to complete your payments with your iPhone, Apple Watch, iPad, and Mac in a safer way. Apple Pay never stores your transaction information. The history is only provided for the user’s convenience.

Earlier, the Apple Pay feature was limited to iPhone 6 and 6 Plus but the most important benefit of having an Apple Watch is that it makes use of NFC which helps to run Apple Play on older devices as well. If you have iPhone 5, 5c or 5s, then you can use Apple Pay along with the Apple Watch to carry out payments and transactions anywhere with just one touch. Apple Pay makes use of Consumer Device Cardholder Verification Method (CDCVM) using Touch ID or the passcode.

Before you wish to use Apple Pay, you have to add a card on your Apple Watch.

Note: You can skip next ten bullet points if you have already using apple pay.

Once the card is added to your iPhone, you can start setting up Apple Pay. Here are the steps which will help you to set up Apple Pay with Apple Watch.

Although it is easy to set up Apple Pay on your Apple watch, you can sometimes find Apple Watch error setting up Apple Pay. This error has been causing hindrance while using the Apple Pay option. This problem has been encountered by many. So, while using the Apple Pay feature on your Apple watch if you find such error and cannot set up Apple Pay in Apple Watch, then here are some of the points to be kept in mind to deal with the error.

One of the Apple’s update of iOS 8.1 has been causing trouble while setting up Apple Pay on the watch. Many users could not set up Apple Pay error in iOS 8.1 as when they tap the option to “Set Up Apple Pay” button; a pop-up message is shown on the screen stating “Could Not Set Up Apple Pay.” However, the only information displayed with the error is “An error occurred while setting up Apple Pay” and an OK button.

Apple Pay is a smart feature. It makes your daily payments and transactions easier. Apple Pay will make your iPhone even smarter with an option to pay your bills with an easy go. The transaction details are kept secured so that you can rest assured of the card and account details. However, if sometimes, you find an error while you set up Apple Pay with Apple Watch, then you can make use of the above mentioned points.|||

If you are an apple watch user, then probably you faced with this issue. Here's How to Solve 'Could Not Set Up Apple Pay' Error In Apple Watch