Microsoft collects many kinds of information in a variety of ways to operate effectively and provide you the best products, services and experiences. We may combine this data with information that is linked to your user ID, such as information associated with your Microsoft account.

When you acquire, install and use the Program software and services, Microsoft collects information about your use of the software and services as well as about the devices and networks on which they operate. Examples of data we may collect include your name, email address, preferences and interests; location, browsing, search and file history; phone call and SMS data; device configuration and sensor data; voice, text and writing input; and application usage. For example, when you:

The Program software and services may contain internet-enabled features and social functionality. When these features are used, they transmit certain standard computer information ("Standard Computer Data") to Microsoft. Standard Computer Data may include information about your computing environment such as IP address, network status, operating conditions and information about devices and software used with the Program software and services.

The Program software and services contain internet-enabled features that transmit performance or usage information to Microsoft (“Experience Data”). Experience Data may include information about performance and reliability, such as how quickly the software and services respond when you click a button or how many problems you experience with a given software or service. Experience Data may also include information about your use of software and services, such as the features used most often or how frequently you launch programs. Experience Data may be collected through the use of cookies or similar technologies; learn more below.

Microsoft automatically collects data from the devices you use with the Program software and services. This may include information about all aspects of the Program software and services, such as device performance, user interface interactions, and feature and application usage, including third party applications.|||

