At Build 2017, Microsoft announced the next wave of Windows 10 innovations built to empower the creator in all of us, the Windows 10 Fall Creators Update. The Windows 10 Creators Update began rolling out last month to more than 500 million Windows 10 devices around the world. It’s exciting to see more than 300 million people using Windows 10 every day for more than 3.5 hours a day on average. Windows 10 Fall Creators Update will be released later this year.

Lets dive into changes and new features of Windows 10 Fall Creators Update and discuss what you should know,

Built on .NET and distributed through the Windows Store as a Universal Windows Application, Story Remix uses AI and deep learning to organize and transform your photos and videos into stories. It will use the Microsoft Graph to connect you and your friends across devices.  Story Remix brings your memories, or even your friends’ photos and videos together to create stories with a soundtrack, theme, and cinematic transitions. You can also create mixed reality by adding 3D objects to your photos and videos to tell stories in a whole new way or turn your photos and videos into your canvas, drawing on them with Windows Ink.

Fluent Design will deliver intuitive, harmonious, responsive and inclusive cross-device experiences and interactions. For developers, Fluent Design is built to help you create more expressive and engaging apps that work across a wide range of device and input diversity. Take a look.

The Microsoft Graph is an intelligent fabric that helps connect dots between people, conversations, projects, and content within the Microsoft Cloud ensuring experiences flow seamlessly between Windows, iOS, and Android devices.

Added 35 new payment instruments this year and now support payments in 247 markets globally.

Spotify announced that it is bringing its app to the Windows Store. More popular apps coming later this year:

The Windows 10 Fall Creators Update will also see the magic of mixed reality brought to consumers around the world.

A customer who pairs a Windows Mixed Reality headset with motion controllers will have a rich and immersive experience across creativity tools, productivity, games, and entertainment. Acer will sell a Windows Mixed Reality headset and motion controller bundle priced at $399 this holiday.

If you live in the US or Canada, pre-order your Windows Mixed Reality dev kit here and start building for mixed reality today.|||

At Build 2017, Microsoft announced the next wave of Windows 10 innovations built to empower the creator in all of us, the Windows 10 Fall Creators Update.