The term miscarriage is used when a woman is unable to maintain her pregnancy and it is terminated at an early stage. It may be intentional or accidental. For an intentional miscarriage, the term "abortion" is used. The term "miscarriage" is used when a pregnancy is terminated without an intention of the mother. In this article, we will discuss the miscarriage, which is accidental or without any intention.

Many women face miscarriages in their life. Some experience this situation again and again. There may be many reasons for this. First, we will discuss the reasons for miscarriage and then will see how to prevent a miscarriage.

The blood of the fetus does not match with that of the mother. It is called "RH factor incompatibility". In this case, RH factor of the fetus does not match with that of the mother. For example, RH factor of the fetus may be positive whereas RH factor of the mother is negative. In this case, the immune system of the mother recognizes the fetus as a foreign body. The immune system of the mother throws the fetus out of the body. This factor is, however, rarely a cause of miscarriage due to the advancement in the health science.

The fertilized egg does not fit in the uterine cavity, a space specified for this purpose. Instead, it is embedded somewhere in the Fallopian tube. The fertilized egg must be implanted in the proper place (uterine cavity) to maintain the pregnancy, otherwise, a miscarriage will occur. It is termed as "Fallopian tube pregnancy" or "tubal pregnancy".

While pregnant, if a woman meets an accident and bears a jerk of a steering wheel on her belly, a miscarriage will occur. Any severe pressure or blunt force to the abdominal area may cause a miscarriage. Sudden falling from the staircase may also cause miscarriage. Slipping and falling with a force may also cause miscarriage.

If a pregnant woman takes recreational or illegal drugs, she may face a high risk of miscarriage. The reason is that these drugs pass from the bloodstream of the mother into the bloodstream of the fetus. At this developmental stage, the organs of the fetus are unable to filter the harmful contents present in these drugs. The harmful substances become toxic to the fetus. When the toxic level is increased, the fetus may die. Some prescribed drugs may also play the same role, leading to a miscarriage.

If a woman has a miscarriage in the past or she had gone through an abortion, the risk of miscarriages in her future pregnancies may be increased. Abortions cause the cervix to become irritable or incompetent, and it results in the miscarriage.

As most of the miscarriages occur due to chromosomal abnormalities, there is not much that can be done to prevent it. But precaution or preventive measures can be taken to avoid occurring of a miscarriage. Following preventive measures will be helpful in preventing miscarriages.|||

The term miscarriage is used when a woman is unable to maintain her pregnancy and it is terminated at an early stage. It may be intentional or accidental....