It seemed like a simple question: Why don't people return their shopping carts? It turned into a full discussion in many corners of the web. Shopping carts are pervasive, and it turns out we have a relatively nuanced relationship with them. Many of the responses fell in line with the original categories but revealed complicated assessments of morality, civility, and economics. Many people believed that returning a cart to a corral when it was present (to be clear, the article was never about returning to a store) was reflective of their behavior in other situations. For example:

These are great examples of how perceptions can drive behavior. For those who view Non-Returners as inconsiderate, they're also cognizant of how they themselves might be perceived. These are the principles that hold our society together: the general sense that we should escalate behaviors that are helpful to the group overall and diminish behaviors that are not. We also tend to want to display how well we exemplify this trait as well, so it is not surprising that so many of the public comments left on the Scientific American Facebook page as well the Anthropology in Practice Facebook page are indicative of this performance with so many commenters identifying as Returners.

There were so many Returners that it prompted me to question whether Non-Returners were intentionally avoiding engagement, but this assumption turned out to be false--the web encourages a frankness that isn't always exhibited in-real-life where potential for conflict can produce unpredictable results. For Non-Returners, the responses fell largely in the camp of economics:

But actual supermarket employees chimed in to indicate they preferred to have carts returned, which creates an interesting quandary for the economic-based Non-Returners:

Whether this creates a change in behavior for this class of non-returners would be interesting to see. It may be unlikely as economically-based Non-Returners also seem to subscribe to the idea that cart returning constitutes free labor:

The public responses to these arguments centered around the idea of managing public spaces--not publicly funded spaces, but spaces that many people will access and interact with the elements in that area. While many stores may indeed have a Cart Attendant, this position isn't on duty all the time. At my local stores, they make periodic appearances that increase in frequency during high volume times. And while they are indeed in charge of collecting carts, by leaving carts in parking spaces, we're preventing others from accessing the spaces we have used until they can be cleared. Minimally, by returning the cart to the corral--if it's possible--we're creating a small courtesy for the next person behind us.

In seeing these debates unfold, it seems more that the economics of the individual are being overlooked. We've commoditized time and labor in a variety of ways; not returning a cart may indeed force a supermarket to hire someone eventually to help if enough people demand the service, but the costs to regular individuals shouldn't be overlooked. And this means more than a potential increase in costs to at the supermarket for goods, but in terms of the time that is lost as an individual may need to find another space to park in, walk farther--particularly an issue if they have health issues--and costs related to damages to their personal property. Where do these issues fall in the spectrum of not returning carts?

The largest debates circled around able-ness and parenting, the latter being compounded by local laws that regulate leaving children alone in the car. It was good to see these points raised as they were certainly not a part of the initial classifications. They highlighted clear challenges to being able to perform normative behaviors at times and called for leniency in specific cases:

But they also demonstrated the immense pull of the social norm as there were also stories of people fulfilling the social expectations despite apparent challenges:

These comments also further emphasize the fracture in expectations held by and of people who are differently abled and parents. Our social nature enables the care and support of those who are less able to function in our society (yes, I am sure someone will bring up elder abandonment shortly), so the question is when do we start to make allowances and how can we encourage that kind of behavior? One commenter framed the discussion beautifully:

We are hoping instead that after reading comments posted here it may help change bad habits or help people learn new ways of solving a problem. We will probably never discuss it again, but many here will definitely think twice when they see a buggy in the lot again. It is not wrong to address things, discuss how to change habits and mindsets or learn why leaving a buggy is a very costly issue. When I went to Strader's Garden Center last week a heavy, 3 tiered buggy for plants smashed into a woman's truck creating a dent and also scratching her vehicle all the way down the passenger side of her vehicle. That could easily be 500 or more in paint and body damage. Money wasted through our insurance companies, working hours etc just because someone didn't care, had kids with them and felt it was too hard to return it, or an elderly person was doing their best just to get to the damn store. The main point is that we all need to look around us and think not only about ourselves and our comforts but those of others.

These discussions were fascinating and represent the epitome of the nature of Anthropology in Practice. Thank you all for participating and contributing--I'd love to run a photo piece on carts in situ. Send me your photos of shopping carts. You can email them to comments@anthropologyinpractice.com or post them on the Facebook page.

The conversation is far from over. Comments have been disabled on Anthropology in Practice, but you can always join the community on Facebook.

You might also like:

Why do we fight for free t-shirts at sporting events?

What are the costs of lending a helping hand?

Why do we say “I’m not sick” when we really are?|||

It looks like the shopping cart question hit a nerve