When Wikileaks released the Shadow Broker’s NSA spyware last month we warned of global hacking. AS we poured over the code we were amazed at the pristine nature of the architecture.  In our private circle of coders we passed exploits back and forth and hammered each other’s console with “nation state” world class code.  We laughed at Microsoft announcement of  patches knowing full well that it will take months or even years to stop the train of codable exploits our government has given the world.

TIn response to The Drudge Report headline  we here at Deeper Than Drudge give you this:

Our prediction for the next year or two is that Nuclear Cyber Weapons will  be on the front page of every newspaper in the world at some point. Ai developing counter measures will be flooded by programs that while at times crude will be brutal. we would like to give you our own analogy for some perspective.

One of the reasons we started this news feed was of course Matt Drudge and The Drudgereport. We have parsed his page daily for years to keep ourselves informed of global events. Lately we have been so turned off by the links he posts for the simple fact that they are overrun with ads. So much so that without ad blockers they are unusable resources. The ad blockers cost money (ransom) and are not very effective. So all ready we are being exploited and hijacked for the sake of the all mighty dollar. Just as a webpage leaves another window under itself that you have to close the malware installed on our machines leave a window that spies on you that is invisible. It has a key logger to record your every key stroke and a audio exploit that “listens ” for your microphone signals and yes even a video recorder that runs 24/7 on your web cam.

Or should we say

Our corrupto spying nation state has given every basement hacker  world class tools to play with. Some will not play so nice.

Our government will go hard after the “leakers” as traitors and put the full weight of law enforcement to bare in a futile attempt to stop the carnage world wide that will prevail. While mainstream media keeps us all worrying about the  “rouge nuk” Cyber Nukes will change the way in which we all must live

Think of it this way. When the world trade towers were struck on 911 it changed our nation. We changed not only the way we think and live but by  the way we are governed. Enter the patriot act. Get my point patriot? So while the gov officinatards will be talking treason, quietly in the backrooms of washington there will be a omunis groups of people that will be building their own exploits to hold us all for ransom. Its coming big time.

Going off line in the future may just not be possible.

If you can build it we can hack it so think twice about your actions.

You are being watched just as you watch us

Now back to our main drag (ad free)

We are deeper, we are anonymous and we are|||

YOU are infected, give us your money puny humans When Wikileaks released the Shadow Broker's NSA spyware last month we warned of global hacking. AS we poured over the code we were amazed at the pristine nature of the architecture.  In our private circle of coders we passed exploits back and forth and hammered…