I recently updated the firmware of my Amcrest IP2M-841 and  IP3M-943 cameras to the latest version. Afterward began noticing a constant connection to three separate, unknown servers.

I found this odd as I had not seen these connections prior to the firmware update.  Performing a simple DNS lookup for each yielded the following:

This clearly shows that all three servers are hosted on Amazon AWS.  Unfortunately this tells  us nothing about who is using Amazon’s infrastructure to talk to my cameras. So to investigate further, I went directly to ec2-52-90-88-253.compute-1.amazonaws.com in the browser, noting to use HTTPS since port 443 was being used.

This triggered a warning that the SSL certificate was not trusted and could not connect.  The error message provided by Chrome was “ERR_BAD_SSL_CLIENT_AUTH_CERT” with no further details.  I was not able to find out the certificate was self-signed by someone named “Dan Burkett” until I used Pale Moon.  So who is Dan Burkett and why are my cameras using a self-signed SSL cert to speak to him?

According to CrunchBase, Dan Burkett is co-founder and CTO at Camcloud, based in Ontario, Canada, where he primarily focuses on platform architecture, mobile development and streaming media.

So is Dan watching me undress?  Probably not, but let’s see how much bandwidth (traffic) my IP2M-841 camera is using to talk to Dan’s servers.  This is accomplished with an SNMP sensor in PRTG once the SNMP option is enabled and the strings set in the camera configuration page.

Over the last two days the traffic has been constant, averaging about 14 kbit/s during the time period.  Is this enough usage to be watching a secret live video feed of me? Not likely as that equates to a transfer rate of 1.75 kilobytes per second.  At this level even a low resolution JPEG snapshot being taken at a reasonable interval would be near impossible.

So what is actually being disseminated to these mysterious cloud servers? The only way to find out would be to complete a packet capture with Wireshark and monitor the traffic in realtime.

Unfortunately the traffic to the mysterious cloud servers is encrypted, so without the server’s private key we will never known what is being transmitted.

However, we are able to find out the DNS names of the servers based on the queries sent from the camera.  Finally the names were revealed when the DNS lookup answers came in:

This shows the constant connection to 52.90.88.253 is the “command server” command-4.amcrestcloud.com.  Amcrest Support was not able to provide any reasons why is this connection necessary.

The last DNS query shows another connection the camera made to another server, dh.amcrestsecurity.com. This connection was not encrypted.

It appears the camera reads the file http://dh.amcrestsecurity.com/readbinfile.html as some sort of firmware check.|||

I recently updated the firmware of my Amcrest IP2M-841 and  IP3M-943 cameras to the latest version. Afterward began noticing a constant connection to three separate, unknown servers. I found this odd as I had not seen these connections prior to the firmware update.  Performing a simple DNS lookup for each yielded the following: ec2-52-90-88-253.compute-1.amazonaws.com ec2-107-23-233-106.compute-1.amazonaws.com…