The following software versions or editions are affected. Versions or editions that are not listed are either past their support life cycle or are not affected. To determine the support life cycle for your software version or edition, see Microsoft Support Lifecycle.

The severity ratings indicated for each affected software assume the potential maximum impact of the vulnerability. For information regarding the likelihood, within 30 days of this security bulletin’s release, of the exploitability of the vulnerability in relation to its severity rating and security impact, please see the Exploitability Index in the March bulletin summary.

Note Please see the Security Update Guide for a new approach to consuming the security update information. You can customize your views and create affected software spreadsheets, as well as download data via a restful API. For more information, please see the Security Updates Guide FAQ. As a reminder, the Security Updates Guide will be replacing security bulletins. Please see our blog post, Furthering our commitment to security updates, for more details.

[1]Beginning with the October 2016 release, Microsoft has changed the update servicing model for Windows 7, Windows Server 2008 R2, Windows 8.1, Windows Server 2012, and Windows Server 2012 R2. For more information, please see this Microsoft TechNet article.

[2]This update is only available via Windows Update.

[3] Windows 10 and Windows Server 2016 updates are cumulative. The monthly security release includes all security fixes for vulnerabilities that affect Windows 10, in addition to non-security updates. The updates are available via the Microsoft Update Catalog. Please note that effective December 13, 2016, Windows 10 and Windows Server 2016 details for the Cumulative Updates will be documented in Release Notes. Please refer to the Release Notes for OS Build numbers, Known Issues, and affected file list information.

*The Updates Replaced column shows only the latest update in any chain of superseded updates. For a comprehensive list of updates replaced, go to the Microsoft Update Catalog, search for the update KB number, and then view update details (updates replaced information is provided on the Package Details tab).|||

