Playing around with @AdamGoodrich Gaia, some really interesting results already and we've just got started #madewithunity #gamedev pic.twitter.com/zC7jGpCfks

New games for old consoles Homebrew has long been a highlight of the game-development scene, but publishing new carts for old consoles is going mainstream. The Verge’s Andrew Webster writes that several such titles are soon to be released, mostly for classic Nintendo boxes. For some, it’s a hobby, a fun way to experiment with programming and design techniques. For […]

FinnAndersen spotted this wonderful vintage portable TV in a dumpster. He gutted most of it and outfitted the shell with a new screen and Raspberry Pi 3 to run RetroPie. Demo video below. “It can emulate everything up to and including N64/PS1/Dreamcast, with a built-in wireless XBOX controller receiver for multiplayer parties!, he writes. “It […]

Tempest is a Pico-8 browser game by impbox that dumps you on an uninhabited island. Not a nice desert island, no, but an unpleasant one much closer to the arctic circle. Gather wood, fruit and fresh water (use the Z key) and see if you can make shelter before the cold night sets in and […]

Drone race like it is the Boonta Eve Classic Looking to break into the rapidly growing world of drone racing? Maybe? Just looking for a solid remote-controlled camera quadcopter to shoot aerial footage? Either way, the Aerix Black Talon 2.0’s friendly controls and stable flight make it a great option for novice and intermediate flyers.The Aerix Black Talon drone is able to fly at 15 […]

Build out WordPress sites faster with this extensive library of themes If you need to quickly build a website for your personal blog, portfolio, or business, WordPress is a great place to start. Unlike drag-and-drop website builders, a WordPress site can be endlessly customized and configured for your needs. But finding a unique, high-quality theme can be tough, and paying a developer to make one for […]

Keep your electronics charged overseas with this international power adapter There still isn’t one unified AC power standard. Although USB power is definitely making plug convergence much more likely to happen down the line, plenty of older buildings still have whatever outlet made sense at the time they were wired for electricity. Since international travel will definitely require power adapters for the foreseeable future, anyone […]|||

