On my back is the big square-boxed bag from Uber Eats. I am on my way to yet another day at work as a bike courier in my quest to find answers to how the conditions really are for those who work for the new and popular food delivery companies; Uber Eats and Foodora.

In a short time four companies have launched in Sweden’s capital, Stockholm. The companies are Foodora from Germany, Uber Eats from the United States, Wolt from Finland and the Swedish company Hungring.se. Both Foodora and Wolt have Swedish stakeholder interests through the families Stenbeck (via Kinnevik) and Wallenberg (via the venture capital company EQT).

In the Swedish public debate, “simple jobs” are often emphasized as the solution to high unemployment among low-skilled workers. Platform companies – those who use technology to connect customers with sellers – are one of the hottest trends in today’s business environment. The “Gig Economy” where there are no employees, only contractors, is now a common concept in the tech community.

Two days later I enter Uber Eats office, housed in a typical residential building in Södermalm. There are a handful of other men waiting with me, who all want that same thing: To earn money.

A few minutes later I am out on the street with a brand-new Uber Eats-bag on my back. To receive the delivery box, I pay a deposit of 500 SEK, which will be offset against future income.

I must pay for the bicycle myself, as well as an essential power bank for my smartphone battery. I start my work in the red.

“Let’s do it” I think to myself, I am prepared for a lunch shift filled with action, which according to Uber Eats is one of the best times to drive.

I am standing in one of the hotspots that Uber Eats, through a map, has advised me to work in.

I am absolutely freezing and decide to wait until the date of the Swedish peoples’ payday as the market should be better then.

“Hello Erik! Today you are guaranteed 300 SEK per hour in “generated amount” when you deliver with Uber Eats during 11:00 am – 1:00 pm & 5:30 pm – 8:30 pm. Hope to see you online!”.

When I review the fine print, which is found inside Ubers app, it appears that the guaranteed amount is only paid under certain conditions. The most important thing is that I must be able to complete one delivery an hour during lunchtime and 1,5 deliveries per hour in the evening shift.

To summarize: If I am guaranteed a payment of 300 SEK, that translates to an hourly pay after fees, but before taxes, of just over 150 SEK plus holiday entitlement. That’s just short of 17 dollars an hour.

Back to the road. Bad weather and Swedish payday should mean loads of deliveries, I think while I cycle up “Götgatan”. After half an hour, my first order comes. I am picking up at “Hornsgatan” and delivering to an address on “Östgötagatan”.

My shoes are cold and wet while waiting online at “Medborgarplatsen” for my evening shift. The clothes did not have time to dry, even though I had been cycling in rainwear.

The pursuit of the “guaranteed” pay takes me, via a delivery to “Hornstull” and then to “Fridhemsplan”. I am cycling down to Phil’s Burger, one of the top selling restaurants in the app. Uber eats gives the order to the courier who is closest to the restaurant.

In one last attempt, I ride my bike back to “Medborgarplatsen”. I finally get an order there. The time has passed 8 pm.

The order consists of an exclusive truffle burger. The smell makes my stomach scream for food. I am hungry, cold and in need of a toilet. I use the restaurant’s restroom before I hit the road again.

My weeks as a bike courier for Uber continues with a lot of waiting and occasional deliveries. I deliver the orders fast, in hope that the algorithm in the app favours fast couriers.

I am out on the streets completely without financial pressure. Breakit pays my salary. My new acquaintances however, many of whom I meet on several occasions, cycle to make money for food and accommodation.

I only meet one person who seems to be happy with working for Uber Eats. He is from one of the former Soviet states – and hopes to be able to study in Sweden.

My seven work shifts at Uber lasted for 18 hours and 21 minutes. In total, I cycled over 170 kilometres. Doing this, I earned 712 SEK ($80) before tax.

It's in the afternoon of April 18th and we're in Foodora’s garage in Östermalm, Stockholm. It is time for onboarding for new bike couriers. There is me, two young guys, and one more middle-aged man who have gathered in the dirty garage.

We have all completed a telephone interview, and been considered suitable candidates. We quickly get down to business: a bike test run. I will only get the job if I complete it in time.

My heart rate increases immediately. I do not know how much time I have got. But I know that our article will fail if cannot complete the test.

I cycle through a red light in front of the Royal Dramatic Theatre and turn onto Birger Jarlsgatan. I continue and turn left onto Kungsgatan. Left turns are prohibited, but I don’t have the time to care. I am in a hurry.

A couple of minutes later I take two selfies just in case. Instead of taking the same route back I take a narrow pedestrian tunnel, “Tunnelgatan”, under the hill that separates Norrmalm and Östermalm.

We sign a contract straight away. I am hired directly by Foodora’s Swedish subsidiary. My salary will be 70 SEK per hour plus 20 SEK per delivery. On weekends, there is no hourly salary but instead 75 SEK per delivery. All numbers are before tax, but before statutory holiday entitlement of 12 percent.

The recruiter tells me that I will probably earn around 120 to 150 SEK, ($13.5–16.9), per hour on weekdays, and between 150 to 300 SEK per hour at weekends.

First, I pick up traditional Swedish food from the restaurant at the top of the department store NK. Then my next delivery is from Vigårda in the shopping mall “Mood-gallerian”. In the app, I notice that I only have ten minutes to deliver the food. I cycle past “Kungsträdgården” and start my four-hour shift for Foodora.

My Foodora colleague was right. Throughout the evening I keep getting orders continuously. The contrast to Uber Eats is huge, and after two hours I start to wonder if I have the strenght to finish the evening or if I will bring shame to Foodora’s pink colours.

I remove layer after layer of clothing as my shift goes on, and put them in the side compartment of my big Foodora bag. I am sweating a lot – and I am starting to feel the miles pedaled.

I am in Vasastan at dusk, hoping that there won’t be any deliveries during my last 15 minutes working.

The time is 10:08 pm and I still have one mile left to get back to Foodora’s garage. I have been told to always drop off the Foodora bag there after my work shift. That means about 15 minutes of work that I do not get paid for.

When I exit the garage, I am tired, but proud that I managed to complete 13 deliveries in just four hours.

Although early in my Foodora career, I already receive plenty of emails and phone calls from the company. One of the phone calls comes from the recruiter, who seems to be my boss.

One day, I receive an email with a large “score card” where both the teams and individual bike couriers are ranked according to Foodora’s metrics. A girl in my team “Road RuNNers” is the best in Stockholm, which sets of a big response in our group chat.

My work for Foodora continues at a high pace, with at least three deliveries an hour. Kungsholmen and Östermalm are the dominating areas. Sometimes I am in Södermalm.

After my two weeks as a Foodora bike courier I am starting to know the routes to most restaurants. I return to popular restaurants, such as Phil’s Burger and Vapiano, several times during my shifts.

“I am doing a double work shift. I have been working for Foodora a long time, so they know what I am capable of”, my Foodora colleague tells me.

By now I have gotten used to cycling over 40 kilometers per shift and deliver food to customers in a fast pace without any problems or complaints.

When I make my 14 deliveries that night, I am less stressed than before. I have learnt to rest a little at the restaurants when there is time left until pick up – and speed up when the bag is full of food.|||

For two weeks, Breakit’s reporter Erik Wisterberg has secretly infiltrated the much-hyped food delivery services Foodora and Uber Eats. We can now reveal the truth behind the life as a bike courier – and the actual numbers behind it.