is a Bounded Model Checker for C and C++ programs. It supports C89, C99, most of C11 and most compiler extensions provided by gcc and Visual Studio. It also supports SystemC using Scoot. We have recently added experimental support for Java Bytecode.

CBMC verifies array bounds (buffer overflows), pointer safety, ex­cep­tions and user-specified as­ser­tions. Furthermore, it can check C and C++ for consistency with other languages, such as Verilog. The verification is performed by unwinding the loops in the program and passing the re­sul­ting equation to a decision procedure.

While is aimed for embedded software, it also supports dynamic memory allocation using and . For questions about , contact Daniel Kroening.

is available for most flavours of Linux (pre-packaged on Debian, Ubuntu and Fedora), Solaris 11, Windows and MacOS X. You should also read the CBMC license.

CBMC comes with a built-in solver for bit-vector formulas that is based on MiniSat. As an alternative, CBMC has featured support for external SMT solvers since version 3.3. The solvers we recommend are (in no particular order) Boolector, MathSAT, Yices 2 and Z3. Note that these solvers need to be installed separately and have different licensing conditions.

There is a Google Group for annoucements related to CBMC.

We also have a list of interesting applications of CBMC.

We are releasing binaries for x86 Linux, Windows, and MacOS, the source code and the Eclipse Plugin. The current version supports the following file formats: ANSI-C, C++, SMV, Verilog, and netlists. Note that there are two executables: for ANSI-C verification only, and , which supports Verilog as well. We are currently preparing a release with support for SpecC and SystemC. Download cbmc-5-7-win.zip, and then unzip the archive. This is a 64-bit binary, and you'll need a corresponding version of Windows. You will furthermore need to run CBMC from the Visual Studio Command Prompt. We recommend you install the free Visual Studio Community. If you have Debian Wheezy or later, or a recent Ubuntu distribution, then install the package cbmc with On Fedora 18 or newer, do On an OpenBSD machine, do Otherwise, download one of the following binaries:

 32-bit Linux/i386: cbmc-5-7-linux-32.tgz

 64-bit Linux/x64: cbmc-5-7-linux-64.tgz

 Do before running. CBMC for MacOS (Intel 64 binary): cbmc-5-7.pkg

 OS X 10.9 or higher is required. The binary is installed in /usr/bin. You need to have the Command Line Tools for Xcode, which can be downloaded here. Source code is available here.

If you need a Model Checker for Verilog or SMV files, consider EBMC.

This research was sponsored by the Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) under contract no. 99-TJ-684, the National Science Foundation (NSF) under grant no. CCR-9803774, the Office of Naval Research (ONR), the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) under contract no. N00014-01-1-0796, and by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, and the Army Research Office (ARO) under contract no. DAAD19-01-1-0485, and the General Motors Collaborative Research Lab at CMU. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the author and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of SRC, NSF, ONR, NRL, DOD, ARO, or the U.S. government. This research is currently supported by EPSRC grant EP/H017585/1.|||

