Count the number of people around you by monitoring wifi signals .

howmanypeoplearearound calculates the number of people in the vicinity using the approximate number of cellphones as a proxy (since 85-95% of people have cellphones nowadays). A cellphone is determined to be in proximity to the computer based on sniffing WiFi probe requests. Possible uses of howmanypeoplearearound include: monitoring foot traffic in an area with Raspberry Pis, seeing if your roommates are home, calculate how many people are on the bus, etc.

Tested on Linux (Raspbian and Ubuntu) and macOS.

There are a number of possible USB WiFi adapters that support monitor mode. Personally I prefer the TN722N which is only ~$10 and works great with every model of the Raspberry Pi. Here is a good list of adapters that support 'ad-hoc' mode for the Raspberry Pi.

Then update it so it can be run as non-root:

You will need to logout and log back in for changes to effect.

If you have Python installed, run this command

First determine which adapter you want to use to scan (usually its ), which you can find the name of using . Then, to run, just type in

You can modify the scan time, designate the adapter, or modify the output using some command-line options.

You can also generate an JSON-formatted output to see what kind of phones are around:

A higher rssi means closer (one of these phones is mine, and the other two are my roommates' who were upstairs).

You can create a log file with the number of people this one-liner (make sure to change your adapter):

howmanypeoplearearound counts up the number of probe requests coming from cellphones in a given amount of time. The probe requests can be "sniffed" from a monitor-mode enabled WiFi adapter using . An acccurate count does depend on everyone having cellphone and also scanning long enough (1 - 10 minutes) to capture the packet when a phone pings the WiFi network (which happens every 1 to 10 minutes unless the phone is off or WiFi is disabled).

This is a simplification of another program I wrote, find-lf which uses a similar idea with a cluster of Raspberry Pis to geolocate positions of cellphones within the vicinity.|||

howmanypeoplearearound - Count the number of people around you :family_man_man_boy: by monitoring wifi signals :satellite: