We are the top rated game IT service providing company, and we also provide the best in class services like web and mobile app development, website designing and development, different kinds of app development, etc. This the classy game and it is being played between friends, family and kids. By playing this particular game, you will also be able to recall your childhood for sure. One of the best kind of cross platform game which also supports the desktop, Android and ios platform too in the online multiplayer mode.

This amazing game has been derived from the game called Pachisi. It is quite identical game with the Spanish board game purchase. It has gained immense popularity with ages, though there has been very little variations to be seen in this particular game as such. This thrilling game is now available for playing in the trendy way in the modernized format too, i.e., as the video gaming application also.

This game is also played between 2 to 4 players at a time and you get the best option for playing this incredible game against the computer, against your friends, or also against people from across the worldwide. The major aim of this game is simple, every player gets 4 tokens and these tokens must be made a full turn of the board and then also make it to the finish line too.

The person who will get all of the 4 tokens till the end, turns out to be the winner of this game. Well, each move can be made only as based on the number which is being decided through the casting of 6 sided die, and every token will only be moving out of their when it casts a six. Moreover, this compensation factor of the games is reached above by the fact that, while moving if another player’s token also lands up on the same square in which there is your token, then your token will be going back home and you will also need to roll the six again.

Ludo is one of the remarkable game which was also played by kings and now it is also being enjoyed by you and also your family and friends. Well, this game play might just appear to be simple at first, then the game also gets quite thrilling and also full audio challenges. You will also be playing this game for hours and it is also fun to play this particular game with complete family too. You need to try beating your opponents and also get competed for the top scores on the Leaderboards.|||

Looking for a ludo game development company India? We offers professional ludo game developers for developing Android ludo games.