How co-working spaces changing the way you work

In the rise of freelance economy, many people starting to leave their job at the office and go build their own. Some people work from home, some people you can find seat next to the coffee shop and some people have nice shared office called co-working space. Although this trend could be very daunting especially if it’s your first time.

According to Deskmag’s annual Global Coworking Survey, 71 percent of participants reported a boost in creativity since joining a coworking space, while 62 percent said their standard of work had improved. Compared to traditional office, many coworkers got self-confidence boost, due to the fact that many spaces are filled with supportive communities that enable creative collaboration.

Here’s a few co-working benefits that could boost your creativity while working:

Grow your network

Whether freelancer or an entrepreneur sometimes talking/ sharing information/ideas while having coffee break together. That conversation usually end up heading to finding employer/ employee or establish more value.

Minimize cost

When you just starting out isn’t usually have a profit, at least in the beginning. With joining co-working, you’re not worries with secured internet connection, setting up address for your contracts or finding place for your business meetings.

Be more productive and more motivated

You will find better people working around at same co-working with you. Which means bright-minded and motivated people too. So, you don’t find any excuse to do procrastinate anymore instead doing your work due to competitive spirit.

Avoid lonesome

Working remotely could be very lonesome. Maybe you don’t need anyone to help you but if you could get shortcut insight and instant feedback while building your first product that would be huge success — less risk.

Collaborate on new projects bigger than you

If you are brave enough to ask, some co-working host could give you a list of affordable worker who will definitely happy to help you creating bigger project.

Getting new ideas from different industries

By combining co-working expertise — people who possessed a broad range of knowledge and had expertise in many fields will have conversation with you and lead to amazing inventions that you could come up with. And you can apply that through your own business.

Nail the location you could have never affordable

Do you want have an office at city center or in the best location? It could be an additional factor your client or potential customer would use your product. The question is how much you could pay for that privilege. Now it’s not matter anymore, you could apply to any co-working space in the world and using their address to your office matter related. Such contracts even create bank account in that location.

Co-working trend bringing the flexibility to work on your way that could leading to greater productivity and job satisfaction. Whether you are freelancer or an entrepreneur, you should give co-working a try. And you will see the benefit yourself.

— Have you tried co-working? And how is it? Leave your comments below.

Stay tune for the next article ;)|||

In the rise of freelance economy, many people starting to leave their job at the office and go build their own. Some people work from home, some people you can find seat next to the coffee shop and…