The monthly holy hour of prayer and song and ensuing music festival are part of an event called Catholic Underground, the creation of the Franciscan Friars of the Renewal, a religious order founded two decades ago this year in the Melrose section of the Bronx. Members own no personal possessions and beg even for their food. Nonetheless, the order’s 10 friaries are bursting with recruits at a moment when many Roman Catholic religious orders are struggling simply to maintain their current numbers.

Their audience this night was primarily students and young professionals. Among the group was a 31-year-old mechanical engineer named Dennis Iglesias, who had driven from Boston after hearing about the event from a friend and then checking it out on YouTube. “It’s amazing when you get a crowd of a lot of young adults together,” Mr. Iglesias shouted over the crowd. “That just amazes me, the fact that there are so many young people who believe.”

After more than two hours of song, laughter and fellowship, Brother Agostino quieted the crowd. “We’re going to finish the night the way we began it — with prayer,” he said. The audience settled down as Brother Columba led them in a collection of psalms and Latin chants.

“Thank you, God bless you, safe home,” Brother Agostino said after a final hymn. “Remember, do not be conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewal of your minds. Peace. God bless you.”

Despite the thoroughly modern sound of the music performed at Catholic Underground, the Friars of the Renewal is an order with deep roots in the past. The order was established as a reform arm of the Capuchin Franciscan order, itself a reform group. St. Francis of Assisi founded the order that bore his name in 1209 with the goal of living a spare and simple life devoted to fraternity and evangelism. Three hundred years later, the Capuchins sought to restore the order’s purity by becoming hermits and adopting long beards and hooded robes to symbolize austerity and simplicity.

Nearly 500 years after that, in 1987, eight Capuchins once again felt the call to renew St. Francis’s vision. With $800 and the approval of Cardinal John O’Connor, the archbishop of New York, they set out to yet again start afresh.

Cardinal O’Connor lent the friars a neglected Polish parish on East 156th Street and Melrose Avenue, which they christened St. Crispin Friary. There, they met all their needs for food and other staples by begging, and they began pursuing their mission on crime-infested streets among drug addicts and burned-out buildings. One of their first acts was to establish an 18-bed shelter, the St. Padre Pio Shelter for Homeless Men, which adjoins the friary and has been open every night since that first Christmas.

The friars devote themselves to evangelizing and fostering a strong prayer and community life while renewing their dedication to poverty, chastity and obedience. Or as the friars like to joke, “No bling-bling, no sweet thing, Christ is King.”

As the order passes its 20th anniversary this year, it has grown to more than 100 members, some from as far away as Australia. Among its 10 friaries are three in New York: St. Joseph’s Friary at 142nd Street in West Harlem and two locations in the Bronx, the original residence and another a block away.

In an average year, several hundred potential candidates discover the order through its Web site, www.franciscanfriars.com, or its television show on the Eternal Word Television Network, and about 30 men ask to join. Typically 12 to 15 are accepted.

“That is high; that is very high,” said Brother Paul Bednarczyk, executive director for the National Religious Vocation Conference, an umbrella organization based in Chicago. “Communities receiving six to eight candidates are on the upswing, which is a good number in this day and age.”

This year, 15 men with an average age of 26 entered the Friars of the Renewal as postulants, or candidates, among them a veteran of the Iraq war and a graduate of Cornell.

“I am always impressed that these are young men of great ability, and usually from backgrounds of academic accomplishment,” said the Rev. Richard John Neuhaus, who teaches the friars at St. Joseph’s Seminary in Dunwoodie, a section of Yonkers. “They could have done a thousand other things, but they have very deliberately chosen the high adventure of being a Friar of the Renewal.”

After six months of prayer, work and study, 12 of the original 15 postulants have continued to the next step. They received their habits, or robes, in March and will spend one year as novices. They may then take three years of temporary vows before professing final vows and becoming permanent brothers in the community. About two-thirds of them will go on to become priests, or fathers.

Such growth defies current trends in American Catholic vocations. Even as the nation’s Catholic population grows, the number of priests and brothers continues to decline. From 1995 to 2005, the number of Catholics in the United States rose from about 57 million to just under 65 million, according to the Center for Applied Research in the Apostolate at Georgetown University, which studies social trends in the Catholic church. At the same time, the number of priests and brothers dropped from about 56,000 to 48,000. These fluctuations have tangible ramifications; the Archdiocese of New York, for example, recently closed 21 parishes in and near the city.

Yet despite the simplicity of the order’s lifestyle, the Friars of the Renewal see their message as one that has a powerful appeal to young people in the 21st century.

“We don’t advertise, we don’t promise you glow-in-the-dark Frisbees, none of that,” said the Rev. Bernard Murphy, the order’s head. “Young people are idealistic, and so we live in a community that lives a high ideal.”

At 5:25 on a Saturday morning, three double clangs of a bell broke the stillness of St. Joseph’s Friary. Twenty-three postulants, brothers and priests had been stirring in their individual rooms since 4:45 a.m.

Each 8-by-10-foot cell had a mat and a sleeping bag but no bed. Most had a simple wooden chair and perhaps a small desk and a lamp. The white walls were bare except for a plain wooden crucifix and a window.

Leaving their sandals by the door, the men silently filed barefoot into the sparsely furnished second-floor chapel, many kneeling to kiss the ground as they entered. A breeze drifted in through an open window, bringing with it the twitter of birds and the racket of car horns.

At 5:30, a postulant named Andy Barrie summoned the men to their knees for morning prayer. The men chanted and prayed the Liturgy of the Hours, a collection of hymns, psalms, readings and intercessions that is prayed five times a day by priests, brothers and nuns around the world.

At 5:50, the men broke for an hour of silent meditation. By 6:45 they were back in their seats to pray the next selection from the Liturgy of the Hours. This was followed by the daily celebration of Mass at dawn.

The brothers’ prayer life structures their entire day. They would pray again at noon, observe a holy hour in front of the Eucharist before dinner, and end their day with evening prayer and a rosary. Every Friday is set aside for quiet prayer at the friary. Once a month, each friar spends a day of silent prayer at the order’s hermitage in Monticello, N.Y., and once a year he goes on a weeklong silent retreat.

The brothers appreciate these hours away from the city.

“Trying to pray in our chapel at 142nd Street,” Postulant Andy explained, “you’re hearing car alarms and people pumping music. So to get up there where we can have complete silence and we can really pray, it’s pretty refreshing.”

After Mass, the brothers headed to the refectory for a breakfast of cold cereal, bread, oranges and coffee. The Rev. Luke Fletcher, vocations director for the friars, poured cornflakes into a bowl and found a seat at the long wooden table. As he ate, he explained that every item the order uses, from cars to buildings to dishwashing soap, is donated or purchased with donations. The friars rely particularly on asking for expired food at local supermarkets and on the generosity of a network of donors who call themselves the “friar suppliers,” to whom they are appropriately grateful.

“For example,” Father Luke said, “when I sit down at breakfast and I pour my cornflakes, I say a prayer for a guy named Charlie who donated the cornflakes. And when I pour the milk, there’s a woman named Uriko who gives us milk every month, so I pray for Uriko. The whole day, that vow of poverty has its effect in a sense of gratitude.”

The Vigil at the Clinic

At 7:45, the postulants headed out the door for a morning of evangelizing. Ten of them piled into a rusted-out, royal blue, 15-passenger Dodge Ram van, a 1987 beauty that was donated by the Franciscan University of Steubenville in Ohio and is plastered with anti-abortion bumper stickers. Four men followed, in a white Oldsmobile Silhouette that the postulants had affectionately christened the Millennium Falcon.

They headed for their usual Saturday destination: Dr. Emily’s Women’s Health Center, a private clinic at Southern Boulevard and East 149th Street in the South Bronx where abortions are performed.

As the sun rose over a hazy Bronx skyline, the men took their positions in front of the concrete-block building. Their goal was to hand out rosaries and leaflets describing options other than abortion available to pregnant women, like adoption and the pregnancy help centers where they volunteer. To comply with the law, the friars are careful not to obstruct the sidewalk or block the women while seeking to counsel them.

Outside the clinic’s front door, four postulants wearing sandals and winter coats laid out a 4-by-5-foot laminated poster of an infant bearing the word “Life” and another poster depicting a fetus in the womb with the caption “8 Weeks After Conception.”

A postulant named Chris Fallon began to pray: “I know that at this very moment a precious pre-born human life in the womb of his mother is in danger of a horrendous death. At this moment, Jesus, I am physically present at the scene to give a witness of your love for this tiny being you knit so wonderfully in his mother’s womb.”

A teenage girl emerged from a blue Jetta. “Can I offer you a leaflet?” asked a postulant named Patrick Fix. The woman hurried past him without speaking.

“You don’t have to do this,” Postulant Patrick persisted. “God will take care of your child.” Escorted by a clinic guard, the girl made her way inside the building. Postulant Patrick resumed his post.

Senior staff members at the clinic declined to comment on what the friars do near their building. “I don’t think that they require any more press,” said a clinic supervisor, who would not give her name. “I think that they’re impressed with themselves, and that should be enough for them.”

The clinic’s Web site states that the clinic believes it is “doing what’s right for today’s women.”

Three hours later, the postulants headed home, exhausted emotionally, spiritually and physically. In all, about two dozen women had visited the clinic, not all of them seeking abortions. Three women decided not to go through with the procedure, a result that re-energized the brothers.

Though such advocacy attracts young men to the Friars of the Renewal, many are also drawn to the order’s rich spiritual dimension and the vibrant community life.

“The millennial generation is a spiritual generation,” said Brother Paul Bednarczyk, of the vocation conference. “I think they are searching for meaning in their life, and I think they are looking to do something that is going to have an impact on the world.”

Postulant Andy, a 26-year-old from Chicago, is typical of today’s postulants. “I was looking at religious orders across the Midwest,” he said. “But I didn’t really fit any of them. You could see a big problem in religious life; it was very evident. A lot of orders didn’t have a prayer life; they didn’t go to Mass daily; they were very loose, not taking their poverty seriously.”

On a frigid January afternoon, the postulants and brothers crowded into the warm kitchen at St. Joseph’s to watch a master chef. Gino Barbaro, a friend of the friars, had traveled from his restaurant near Peekskill to help them cook a special meal for the weekly luncheon they serve to the needy in the neighborhood.

Mr. Barbaro showed them how to make pizza with zucchini, spaghetti with meatballs, sausages, lentil soup and sautéed potatoes. The smell of garlic perfumed the air.

Each of the 40-odd guests who showed up had an individual struggle.

Audrey Murdock, who lived down the block, said that she used to illegally sell steroids to bodybuilders, but that after spending time in jail, she was studying nursing. She said she appreciated the friars’ warm food and spiritual guidance. “When you’re running on an empty tank,” she added, “they’re pretty much there to fill up that tank.”

Rochelle Cummings, who lost her left leg when she was hit by a fire truck seven years ago, maneuvered her wheelchair up to one of the tables. “Did I miss the prayer already?” she asked. With her hands outstretched in front of her, she prayed her own blessing, then dug into her soup.

“Ever since I started coming here, I feel better about myself,” Ms. Cummings said as she ate. “I want to live again. Everything I eat here is spiritual.”|||

Even as other Roman Catholic orders are seeing their numbers dwindle, the bearded, gray-frocked Friars of the Renewal attract recruits to their lively but spartan monastic life.