Misha Glenny: McMafia: A Journey Through the Global Criminal Underworld (Borzoi Books)

This is a detailed backgrounder on the rise of transnational criminal groups in every region of the world. Great read!

Dmitry Orlov: Reinventing Collapse: The Soviet Example and American Prospects

Thought provoking analysis of the Soviet Union's collapse and its implications for the US.

Benerson Little: The Sea Rover's Practice: Pirate Tactics and Techniques, 16301730

Excellent review and analysis of the tactics and social structure of piracy. Separates fact from fiction.

John Arquilla: Our Own Worst Enemy: The Reluctant Transformation of the American Military

Just finished an early review copy (it's available for preorder). Excellent insight into how to revitalize the US military.

Nassim Nicholas Taleb: The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable

An excellent book on uncertainty. Nassim's premise is that the big events that shape the world aren't predictable. He provides ways to identify them early.

Robert Young Pelton: Licensed to Kill: Hired Guns in the War on Terror

A history of the rise of the modern mercenary industry. The author provides an excellent "feel" for the current personalities and their ambitions.

Chet Richards: Neither Shall the Sword: Conflict in the Years Ahead

Chet makes the argument for privatizing large sections of the US military and turning it into a flexible force that can respond effectively to non-state threats.

ROBERT BUNKER: Networks, Terrorism and Global Insurgency

Excellent collection of writing by some leading thinkers in 21st Century military theory. Use a corporate account to buy it (it's expensive).

Francis Fukuyama: The End of History and the Last Man

Contains the assumption upon which the US is building nations in Iraq and Afghanistan.

Moises Naim: Illicit : How Smugglers, Traffickers and Copycats are Hijacking the Global Economy

This book details the market mechanism underlying the emergence of global terrorism. It demonstrates, with excellent examples, how non-state threats are growing faster than the ability of states to respond to them. A must read.

Thomas X. Hammes: The Sling and the Stone: On War in the 21st Century

Good discussion of 4th generation warfare (from the perspective of Mao and Ho). Great foundation for further study.|||

"I was only following corporate algorithms" Testimony given at a future war crimes trial (riff on the Nuremberg defense) United Airlines forcibly removed a man from an "overbooked" flight. The incident was captured on video by other passengers and the...